PMID 36413377 :: LungMAP Portal Ecosystem: Systems-level Exploration of the Lung.
   ABS: An improved understanding of the human lung necessitates advanced systems models informed by an ever-increasing repertoire of molecular omics, cellular imaging, and pathological datasets. To centralize and standardize information across broad lung research efforts, we expanded the LungMAP.net website into a new gateway portal. This portal connects a broad spectrum of research networks, bulk and single-cell multiomics data, and a diverse collection of image data that span mammalian lung development and disease. The data are standardized across species and technologies using harmonized data and metadata models that leverage recent advances, including those from the Human Cell Atlas, diverse ontologies, and the LungMAP CellCards initiative. To cultivate future discoveries, we have aggregated a diverse collection of single-cell atlases for multiple species (human, rhesus, and mouse) to enable consistent queries across technologies, cohorts, age, disease, and drug treatment. These atlases are provided as independent and integrated queryable datasets, with an emphasis on dynamic visualization, figure generation, reanalysis, cell-type curation, and automated reference-based classification of user-provided single-cell genomics datasets (Azimuth). As this resource grows, we intend to increase the breadth of available interactive interfaces, supported data types, data portals and dataset

PMID 33385216 :: Lung Gene Expression Analysis Web Portal Version 3: Lung-at-a-Glance.
   ABS: (none)

PMID 28798251 :: LungMAP: The Molecular Atlas of Lung Development Program.
   ABS: The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute is funding an effort to create a molecular atlas of the developing lung (LungMAP) to serve as a research resource and public education tool. The lung is a complex organ with lengthy development time driven by interactive gene networks and dynamic cross talk among multiple cell types to control and coordinate lineage specification, cell proliferation, differentiation, migration, morphogenesis, and injury repair. A better understanding of the processes that regulate lung development, particularly alveologenesis, will have a significant impact on survival rates for premature infants born with incomplete lung development and will facilitate lung injury repair and regeneration in adults. A consortium of four research centers, a data coordinating center, and a human tissue repository provides high-quality molecular data of developing human and mouse lungs. LungMAP includes mouse and human data for cross correlation of developmental processes across species. LungMAP is generating foundational data and analysis, creating a web portal for presentation of results and public sharing of data sets, establishing a repository of young human lung tissues obtained through organ donor organizations, and developing a comprehensive lung ontology that incorporates the latest findings of the consortium. The LungMAP website (www.lungmap.net) currently con

PMID 34936882 :: A census of the lung: CellCards from LungMAP.
   ABS: The human lung plays vital roles in respiration, host defense, and basic physiology. Recent technological advancements such as single-cell RNA sequencing and genetic lineage tracing have revealed novel cell types and enriched functional properties of existing cell types in lung. The time has come to take a new census. Initiated by members of the NHLBI-funded LungMAP Consortium and aided by experts in the lung biology community, we synthesized current data into a comprehensive and practical cellular census of the lung. Identities of cell types in the normal lung are captured in individual cell cards with delineation of function, markers, developmental lineages, heterogeneity, regenerative potential, disease links, and key experimental tools. This publication will serve as the starting point of a live, up-to-date guide for lung research at https://www.lungmap.net/cell-cards/. We hope that Lung CellCards will promote the community-wide effort to establish, maintain, and restore respiratory health.

PMID 37516747 :: Guided construction of single cell reference for human and mouse lung.
   ABS: Accurate cell type identification is a key and rate-limiting step in single-cell data analysis. Single-cell references with comprehensive cell types, reproducible and functionally validated cell identities, and common nomenclatures are much needed by the research community for automated cell type annotation, data integration, and data sharing. Here, we develop a computational pipeline utilizing the LungMAP CellCards as a dictionary to consolidate single-cell transcriptomic datasets of 104 human lungs and 17 mouse lung samples to construct LungMAP single-cell reference (CellRef) for both normal human and mouse lungs. CellRefs define 48 human and 40 mouse lung cell types catalogued from diverse anatomic locations and developmental time points. We demonstrate the accuracy and stability of LungMAP CellRefs and their utility for automated cell type annotation of both normal and diseased lungs using multiple independent methods and testing data. We develop user-friendly web interfaces for easy access and maximal utilization of the LungMAP CellRefs.

PMID 37291214 :: An integrated cell atlas of the lung in health and disease.
   ABS: Single-cell technologies have transformed our understanding of human tissues. Yet, studies typically capture only a limited number of donors and disagree on cell type definitions. Integrating many single-cell datasets can address these limitations of individual studies and capture the variability present in the population. Here we present the integrated Human Lung Cell Atlas (HLCA), combining 49 datasets of the human respiratory system into a single atlas spanning over 2.4 million cells from 486 individuals. The HLCA presents a consensus cell type re-annotation with matching marker genes, including annotations of rare and previously undescribed cell types. Leveraging the number and diversity of individuals in the HLCA, we identify gene modules that are associated with demographic covariates such as age, sex and body mass index, as well as gene modules changing expression along the proximal-to-distal axis of the bronchial tree. Mapping new data to the HLCA enables rapid data annotation and interpretation. Using the HLCA as a reference for the study of disease, we identify shared cell states across multiple lung diseases, including SPP1+ profibrotic monocyte-derived macrophages in COVID-19, pulmonary fibrosis and lung carcinoma. Overall, the HLCA serves as an example for the development and use of large-scale, cross-dataset organ atlases within the Human Cell Atlas.

PMID 33208946 :: A molecular cell atlas of the human lung from single-cell RNA sequencing.
   ABS: Although single-cell RNA sequencing studies have begun to provide compendia of cell expression profiles1-9, it has been difficult to systematically identify and localize all molecular cell types in individual organs to create a full molecular cell atlas. Here, using droplet- and plate-based single-cell RNA sequencing of approximately 75,000 human cells across all lung tissue compartments and circulating blood, combined with a multi-pronged cell annotation approach, we create an extensive cell atlas of the human lung. We define the gene expression profiles and anatomical locations of 58 cell populations in the human lung, including 41 out of 45 previously known cell types and 14 previously unknown ones. This comprehensive molecular atlas identifies the biochemical functions of lung cells and the transcription factors and markers for making and monitoring them; defines the cell targets of circulating hormones and predicts local signalling interactions and immune cell homing; and identifies cell types that are directly affected by lung disease genes and respiratory viruses. By comparing human and mouse data, we identified 17 molecular cell types that have been gained or lost during lung evolution and others with substantially altered expression profiles, revealing extensive plasticity of cell types and cell-type-specific gene expression during organ evolution including expression 

PMID 32996785 :: The Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis Cell Atlas.
   ABS: (none)

PMID 32832599 :: Single-cell RNA-seq reveals ectopic and aberrant lung-resident cell populations in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
   ABS: We provide a single-cell atlas of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), a fatal interstitial lung disease, by profiling 312,928 cells from 32 IPF, 28 smoker and nonsmoker controls, and 18 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) lungs. Among epithelial cells enriched in IPF, we identify a previously unidentified population of aberrant basaloid cells that coexpress basal epithelial, mesenchymal, senescence, and developmental markers and are located at the edge of myofibroblast foci in the IPF lung. Among vascular endothelial cells, we identify an ectopically expanded cell population transcriptomically identical to bronchial restricted vascular endothelial cells in IPF. We confirm the presence of both populations by immunohistochemistry and independent datasets. Among stromal cells, we identify IPF myofibroblasts and invasive fibroblasts with partially overlapping cells in control and COPD lungs. Last, we confirm previous findings of profibrotic macrophage populations in the IPF lung. Our comprehensive catalog reveals the complexity and diversity of aberrant cellular populations in IPF.

PMID 32832598 :: Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals profibrotic roles of distinct epithelial and mesenchymal lineages in pulmonary fibrosis.
   ABS: Pulmonary fibrosis (PF) is a form of chronic lung disease characterized by pathologic epithelial remodeling and accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM). To comprehensively define the cell types, mechanisms, and mediators driving fibrotic remodeling in lungs with PF, we performed single-cell RNA sequencing of single-cell suspensions from 10 nonfibrotic control and 20 PF lungs. Analysis of 114,396 cells identified 31 distinct cell subsets/states. We report that a remarkable shift in epithelial cell phenotypes occurs in the peripheral lung in PF and identify several previously unrecognized epithelial cell phenotypes, including a KRT5- /KRT17 + pathologic, ECM-producing epithelial cell population that was highly enriched in PF lungs. Multiple fibroblast subtypes were observed to contribute to ECM expansion in a spatially discrete manner. Together, these data provide high-resolution insights into the complexity and plasticity of the distal lung epithelium in human disease and indicate a diversity of epithelial and mesenchymal cells contribute to pathologic lung fibrosis.

PMID 35078977 :: Characterization of the COPD alveolar niche using single-cell RNA sequencing.
   ABS: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of death worldwide, however our understanding of cell specific mechanisms underlying COPD pathobiology remains incomplete. Here, we analyze single-cell RNA sequencing profiles of explanted lung tissue from subjects with advanced COPD or control lungs, and we validate findings using single-cell RNA sequencing of lungs from mice exposed to 10 months of cigarette smoke, RNA sequencing of isolated human alveolar epithelial cells, functional in vitro models, and in situ hybridization and immunostaining of human lung tissue samples. We identify a subpopulation of alveolar epithelial type II cells with transcriptional evidence for aberrant cellular metabolism and reduced cellular stress tolerance in COPD. Using transcriptomic network analyses, we predict capillary endothelial cells are inflamed in COPD, particularly through increased CXCL-motif chemokine signaling. Finally, we detect a high-metallothionein expressing macrophage subpopulation enriched in advanced COPD. Collectively, these findings highlight cell-specific mechanisms involved in the pathobiology of advanced COPD.

PMID 31209336 :: A cellular census of human lungs identifies novel cell states in health and in asthma.
   ABS: Human lungs enable efficient gas exchange and form an interface with the environment, which depends on mucosal immunity for protection against infectious agents. Tightly controlled interactions between structural and immune cells are required to maintain lung homeostasis. Here, we use single-cell transcriptomics to chart the cellular landscape of upper and lower airways and lung parenchyma in healthy lungs, and lower airways in asthmatic lungs. We report location-dependent airway epithelial cell states and a novel subset of tissue-resident memory T cells. In the lower airways of patients with asthma, mucous cell hyperplasia is shown to stem from a novel mucous ciliated cell state, as well as goblet cell hyperplasia. We report the presence of pathogenic effector type 2 helper T cells (TH2) in asthmatic lungs and find evidence for type 2 cytokines in maintaining the altered epithelial cell states. Unbiased analysis of cell-cell interactions identifies a shift from airway structural cell communication in healthy lungs to a TH2-dominated interactome in asthmatic lungs.

PMID 32726565 :: A Single-Cell Atlas of the Human Healthy Airways.
   ABS: Rationale: The respiratory tract constitutes an elaborate line of defense that is based on a unique cellular ecosystem.Objectives: We aimed to investigate cell population distributions and transcriptional changes along the airways by using single-cell RNA profiling.Methods: We have explored the cellular heterogeneity of the human airway epithelium in 10 healthy living volunteers by single-cell RNA profiling. A total of 77,969 cells were collected at 35 distinct locations, from the nose to the 12th division of the airway tree.Measurements and Main Results: The resulting atlas is composed of a high percentage of epithelial cells (89.1%) but also immune (6.2%) and stromal (4.7%) cells with distinct cellular proportions in different regions of the airways. It reveals differential gene expression between identical cell types (suprabasal, secretory, and multiciliated cells) from the nose (MUC4, PI3, SIX3) and tracheobronchial (SCGB1A1, TFF3) airways. By contrast, cell-type-specific gene expression is stable across all tracheobronchial samples. Our atlas improves the description of ionocytes, pulmonary neuroendocrine cells, and brush cells and identifies a related population of NREP-positive cells. We also report the association of KRT13 with dividing cells that are reminiscent of previously described mouse "hillock" cells and with squamous cells expressing SCEL and SPRR1A/B.Conclusio

PMID 31949184 :: PulmonDB: a curated lung disease gene expression database.
   ABS: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) and Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF) have contrasting clinical and pathological characteristics and interesting whole-genome transcriptomic profiles. However, data from public repositories are difficult to reprocess and reanalyze. Here, we present PulmonDB, a web-based database (http://pulmondb.liigh.unam.mx/) and R library that facilitates exploration of gene expression profiles for these diseases by integrating transcriptomic data and curated annotation from different sources. We demonstrated the value of this resource by presenting the expression of already well-known genes of COPD and IPF across multiple experiments and the results of two differential expression analyses in which we successfully identified differences and similarities. With this first version of PulmonDB, we create a new hypothesis and compare the two diseases from a transcriptomics perspective.

PMID 31600171 :: Transcriptional regulatory model of fibrosis progression in the human lung.
   ABS: To develop a systems biology model of fibrosis progression within the human lung we performed RNA sequencing and microRNA analysis on 95 samples obtained from 10 idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and 6 control lungs. Extent of fibrosis in each sample was assessed by microCT-measured alveolar surface density (ASD) and confirmed by histology. Regulatory gene expression networks were identified using linear mixed-effect models and dynamic regulatory events miner (DREM). Differential gene expression analysis identified a core set of genes increased or decreased before fibrosis was histologically evident that continued to change with advanced fibrosis. DREM generated a systems biology model (www.sb.cs.cmu.edu/IPFReg) that identified progressively divergent gene expression tracks with microRNAs and transcription factors that specifically regulate mild or advanced fibrosis. We confirmed model predictions by demonstrating that expression of POU2AF1, previously unassociated with lung fibrosis but proposed by the model as regulator, is increased in B lymphocytes in IPF lungs and that POU2AF1-knockout mice were protected from bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis. Our results reveal distinct regulation of gene expression changes in IPF tissue that remained structurally normal compared with moderate or advanced fibrosis and suggest distinct regulatory mechanisms for each stage.

PMID 33707239 :: Genomic, epigenomic, and biophysical cues controlling the emergence of the lung alveolus.
   ABS: The lung alveolus is the functional unit of the respiratory system required for gas exchange. During the transition to air breathing at birth, biophysical forces are thought to shape the emerging tissue niche. However, the intercellular signaling that drives these processes remains poorly understood. Applying a multimodal approach, we identified alveolar type 1 (AT1) epithelial cells as a distinct signaling hub. Lineage tracing demonstrates that AT1 progenitors align with receptive, force-exerting myofibroblasts in a spatial and temporal manner. Through single-cell chromatin accessibility and pathway expression (SCAPE) analysis, we demonstrate that AT1-restricted ligands are required for myofibroblasts and alveolar formation. These studies show that the alignment of cell fates, mediated by biophysical and AT1-derived paracrine signals, drives the extensive tissue remodeling required for postnatal respiration.

PMID 34927678 :: A single-cell atlas of mouse lung development.
   ABS: Lung organogenesis requires precise timing and coordination to effect spatial organization and function of the parenchymal cells. To provide a systematic broad-based view of the mechanisms governing the dynamic alterations in parenchymal cells over crucial periods of development, we performed a single-cell RNA-sequencing time-series yielding 102,571 epithelial, endothelial and mesenchymal cells across nine time points from embryonic day 12 to postnatal day 14 in mice. Combining computational fate-likelihood prediction with RNA in situ hybridization and immunofluorescence, we explore lineage relationships during the saccular to alveolar stage transition. The utility of this publicly searchable atlas resource (www.sucrelab.org/lungcells) is exemplified by discoveries of the complexity of type 1 pneumocyte function and characterization of mesenchymal Wnt expression patterns during the saccular and alveolar stages - wherein major expansion of the gas-exchange surface occurs. We provide an integrated view of cellular dynamics in epithelial, endothelial and mesenchymal cell populations during lung organogenesis.

PMID 33164753 :: Single-cell multiomic profiling of human lungs reveals cell-type-specific and age-dynamic control of SARS-CoV2 host genes.
   ABS: Respiratory failure associated with COVID-19 has placed focus on the lungs. Here, we present single-nucleus accessible chromatin profiles of 90,980 nuclei and matched single-nucleus transcriptomes of 46,500 nuclei in non-diseased lungs from donors of ~30 weeks gestation,~3 years and ~30 years. We mapped candidate cis-regulatory elements (cCREs) and linked them to putative target genes. We identified distal cCREs with age-increased activity linked to SARS-CoV-2 host entry gene TMPRSS2 in alveolar type 2 cells, which had immune regulatory signatures and harbored variants associated with respiratory traits. At the 3p21.31 COVID-19 risk locus, a candidate variant overlapped a distal cCRE linked to SLC6A20, a gene expressed in alveolar cells and with known functional association with the SARS-CoV-2 receptor ACE2. Our findings provide insight into regulatory logic underlying genes implicated in COVID-19 in individual lung cell types across age. More broadly, these datasets will facilitate interpretation of risk loci for lung diseases.

PMID 34922464 :: Comprehensive epigenomic profiling of human alveolar epithelial differentiation identifies key epigenetic states and transcription factor co-regulatory networks for maintenance of distal lung identity.
   ABS: Disruption of alveolar epithelial cell (AEC) differentiation is implicated in distal lung diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, and lung adenocarcinoma that impact morbidity and mortality worldwide. Elucidating underlying disease pathogenesis requires a mechanistic molecular understanding of AEC differentiation. Previous studies have focused on changes of individual transcription factors, and to date no study has comprehensively characterized the dynamic, global epigenomic alterations that facilitate this critical differentiation process in humans. We comprehensively profiled the epigenomic states of human AECs during type 2 to type 1-like cell differentiation, including the methylome and chromatin functional domains, and integrated this with transcriptome-wide RNA expression data. Enhancer regions were drastically altered during AEC differentiation. Transcription factor binding analysis within enhancer regions revealed diverse interactive networks with enrichment for many transcription factors, including NKX2-1 and FOXA family members, as well as transcription factors with less well characterized roles in AEC differentiation, such as members of the MEF2, TEAD, and AP1 families. Additionally, associations among transcription factors changed during differentiation, implicating a complex network of heterotrimeric complex switching 

PMID 34030460 :: Integrated Single-Cell Atlas of Endothelial Cells of the Human Lung.
   ABS: Cellular diversity of the lung endothelium has not been systematically characterized in humans. We provide a reference atlas of human lung endothelial cells (ECs) to facilitate a better understanding of the phenotypic diversity and composition of cells comprising the lung endothelium. We reprocessed human control single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) data from 6 datasets. EC populations were characterized through iterative clustering with subsequent differential expression analysis. Marker genes were validated by fluorescent microscopy and in situ hybridization. scRNAseq of primary lung ECs cultured in vitro was performed. The signaling network between different lung cell types was studied. For cross-species analysis or disease relevance, we applied the same methods to scRNAseq data obtained from mouse lungs or from human lungs with pulmonary hypertension. Six lung scRNAseq datasets were reanalyzed and annotated to identify >15 000 vascular EC cells from 73 individuals. Differential expression analysis of EC revealed signatures corresponding to endothelial lineage, including panendothelial, panvascular, and subpopulation-specific marker gene sets. Beyond the broad cellular categories of lymphatic, capillary, arterial, and venous ECs, we found previously indistinguishable subpopulations; among venous EC, we identified 2 previously indistinguishable populations: pulmonary-venous 

PMID 39461973 :: An integrative network-based approach to identify driving gene communities in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
   ABS: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an etiologically complex disease characterized by acute exacerbations and stable phases. We aimed to identify biological functions modulated in specific COPD conditions, using whole blood samples collected in the AERIS clinical study (NCT01360398). Considered conditions were exacerbation onset, severity of airway obstruction, and presence of respiratory pathogens in sputum samples. With an integrative multi-network gene community detection (MNGCD) approach, we analyzed expression profiles to identify communities of correlated genes. The approach combined different layers of gene interactions for each explored condition/subset of samples: gene expression similarity, protein-protein interactions, transcription factors, and microRNAs validated regulons. Heme metabolism, interferon-alpha, and interferon-gamma pathways were modulated in patients at both exacerbation and stable-state visits, but with the involvement of distinct sets of genes. An important gene community was enriched with G2M checkpoint, E2F targets, and mitotic spindle pathways during exacerbation. Targets of TAL1 regulator and hsa-let-7b - 5p microRNA were modulated with increasing severity of airway obstruction. Bacterial infections with Moraxella catarrhalis and, particularly, Haemophilus influenzae triggered a specific cellular and inflammatory response in acute exa

PMID 36661515 :: Lung Cancer Gene Regulatory Network of Transcription Factors Related to the Hallmarks of Cancer.
   ABS: The transcriptomic analysis of microarray and RNA-Seq datasets followed our own bioinformatic pipeline to identify a transcriptional regulatory network of lung cancer. Twenty-six transcription factors are dysregulated and co-expressed in most of the lung cancer and pulmonary arterial hypertension datasets, which makes them the most frequently dysregulated transcription factors. Co-expression, gene regulatory, coregulatory, and transcriptional regulatory networks, along with fibration symmetries, were constructed to identify common connection patterns, alignments, main regulators, and target genes in order to analyze transcription factor complex formation, as well as its synchronized co-expression patterns in every type of lung cancer. The regulatory function of the most frequently dysregulated transcription factors over lung cancer deregulated genes was validated with ChEA3 enrichment analysis. A Kaplan-Meier plotter analysis linked the dysregulation of the top transcription factors with lung cancer patients' survival. Our results indicate that lung cancer has unique and common deregulated genes and transcription factors with pulmonary arterial hypertension, co-expressed and regulated in a coordinated and cooperative manner by the transcriptional regulatory network that might be associated with critical biological processes and signaling pathways related to the acquisition of t

PMID 29236308 :: Database of transcription factors in lung cancer (DBTFLC): A novel resource for exploring transcription factors associated with lung cancer.
   ABS: Lung cancer is considered as the most prevalent form of cancer and it is found to be frequent cause of cancer related death. Even though, approved molecular targeted therapies other than chemotherapy are currently unavailable, the mechanism of pathogenesis in lung cancer remains still unclear. Transcription factors (TFs) play a critical role in cancer cell processes, such as cell proliferation, apoptosis, migration, and regulate gene expression. Thus, the identification and characterization of transcription factors involved in lung cancer would provide valuable information for further elucidation of the mechanism(s) underlying pathogenesis and the identification of potential therapeutic target types, which are critical for the development of therapeutic strategies. Through an extensive literature survey, we have identified 349 transcription factors noted for their strong involvement in lung cancer. Database of Transcription Factors in Lung Cancer (DBTFLC) was constructed as a data repository and analytical platform for systematic collection, curation of TFs and their interacting partners. The database includes all pertinent information such as lung cancer related TFs, chromosomal location, family, lung cancer type, references, TF-TF interaction(s), and TF-target gene interaction(s); thus, it could serve as a valuable resource for therapeutic studies in lung cancer. The database

PMID 39167456 :: Integrative Multiomics in the Lung Reveals a Protective Role of Asporin in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.
   ABS: Integrative multiomics can elucidate pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) pathobiology, but procuring human PAH lung samples is rare. We leveraged transcriptomic profiling and deep phenotyping of the largest multicenter PAH lung biobank to date (96 disease and 52 control) by integration with clinicopathologic data, genome-wide association studies, Bayesian regulatory networks, single-cell transcriptomics, and pharmacotranscriptomics. We identified 2 potentially protective gene network modules associated with vascular cells, and we validated ASPN, coding for asporin, as a key hub gene that is upregulated as a compensatory response to counteract PAH. We found that asporin is upregulated in lungs and plasma of multiple independent PAH cohorts and correlates with reduced PAH severity. We show that asporin inhibits proliferation and transforming growth factor-β/phosphorylated SMAD2/3 signaling in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells from PAH lungs. We demonstrate in Sugen-hypoxia rats that ASPN knockdown exacerbated PAH and recombinant asporin attenuated PAH. Our integrative systems biology approach to dissect the PAH lung transcriptome uncovered asporin as a novel protective target with therapeutic potential in PAH.

PMID 42261399 :: A Single Cell Atlas of the COPD Lung Identifies Inflammatory Reprogramming in Fibroblasts.
   ABS: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by persistent inflammation, structural remodeling, and irreversible airflow limitation, but the cellular mechanisms that sustain chronic inflammatory remodeling remain poorly understood. We integrated newly generated single cell transcriptomic data with publicly available datasets, comprising 6 healthy controls and 10 patients with COPD. Gene expression programs, intercellular communication, pseudotime trajectories, and transcription factor regulatory networks were assessed to define fibroblast associated changes in COPD lung tissue. Fibroblasts exhibited the strongest outgoing signaling activity among lung parenchymal cells and showed the greatest increase in outgoing signaling in COPD. Across multiple fibroblast subpopulations, fibroblasts from COPD lungs acquired a shared proinflammatory and immunoregulatory state associated with inflammatory activation, tissue injury, and fibrotic remodeling. This state was characterized by increased expression of inflammatory mediators and enhanced potential to promote immune cell recruitment and activation. Regulatory analyses further suggested that this inflammatory program was accompanied by extensive remodeling of transcription factor networks in fibroblasts. These findings identify fibroblasts as key immunoregulatory cells in COPD lung tissue and suggest that fibroblast ass

PMID 29087512 :: TRRUST v2: an expanded reference database of human and mouse transcriptional regulatory interactions.
   ABS: Transcription factors (TFs) are major trans-acting factors in transcriptional regulation. Therefore, elucidating TF-target interactions is a key step toward understanding the regulatory circuitry underlying complex traits such as human diseases. We previously published a reference TF-target interaction database for humans-TRRUST (Transcriptional Regulatory Relationships Unraveled by Sentence-based Text mining)-which was constructed using sentence-based text mining, followed by manual curation. Here, we present TRRUST v2 (www.grnpedia.org/trrust) with a significant improvement from the previous version, including a significantly increased size of the database consisting of 8444 regulatory interactions for 800 TFs in humans. More importantly, TRRUST v2 also contains a database for TF-target interactions in mice, including 6552 TF-target interactions for 828 mouse TFs. TRRUST v2 is also substantially more comprehensive and less biased than other TF-target interaction databases. We also improved the web interface, which now enables prioritization of key TFs for a physiological condition depicted by a set of user-input transcriptional responsive genes. With the significant expansion in the database size and inclusion of the new web tool for TF prioritization, we believe that TRRUST v2 will be a versatile database for the study of the transcriptional regulation involved in human dise

PMID 32858223 :: hTFtarget: A Comprehensive Database for Regulations of Human Transcription Factors and Their Targets.
   ABS: Transcription factors (TFs) as key regulators play crucial roles in biological processes. The identification of TF-target regulatory relationships is a key step for revealing functions of TFs and their regulations on gene expression. The accumulated data of chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) provide great opportunities to discover the TF-target regulations across different conditions. In this study, we constructed a database named hTFtarget, which integrated huge human TF target resources (7190 ChIP-seq samples of 659 TFs and high-confidence binding sites of 699 TFs) and epigenetic modification information to predict accurate TF-target regulations. hTFtarget offers the following functions for users to explore TF-target regulations: (1) browse or search general targets of a query TF across datasets; (2) browse TF-target regulations for a query TF in a specific dataset or tissue; (3) search potential TFs for a given target gene or non-coding RNA; (4) investigate co-association between TFs in cell lines; (5) explore potential co-regulations for given target genes or TFs; (6) predict candidate TF binding sites on given DNA sequences; (7) visualize ChIP-seq peaks for different TFs and conditions in a genome browser. hTFtarget provides a comprehensive, reliable and user-friendly resource for exploring human TF-target regulations, which will be very useful for a wide 

PMID 31114921 :: ChEA3: transcription factor enrichment analysis by orthogonal omics integration.
   ABS: Identifying the transcription factors (TFs) responsible for observed changes in gene expression is an important step in understanding gene regulatory networks. ChIP-X Enrichment Analysis 3 (ChEA3) is a transcription factor enrichment analysis tool that ranks TFs associated with user-submitted gene sets. The ChEA3 background database contains a collection of gene set libraries generated from multiple sources including TF-gene co-expression from RNA-seq studies, TF-target associations from ChIP-seq experiments, and TF-gene co-occurrence computed from crowd-submitted gene lists. Enrichment results from these distinct sources are integrated to generate a composite rank that improves the prediction of the correct upstream TF compared to ranks produced by individual libraries. We compare ChEA3 with existing TF prediction tools and show that ChEA3 performs better. By integrating the ChEA3 libraries, we illuminate general transcription factor properties such as whether the TF behaves as an activator or a repressor. The ChEA3 web-server is available from https://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/ChEA3.

PMID 31340985 :: Benchmark and integration of resources for the estimation of human transcription factor activities.
   ABS: The prediction of transcription factor (TF) activities from the gene expression of their targets (i.e., TF regulon) is becoming a widely used approach to characterize the functional status of transcriptional regulatory circuits. Several strategies and data sets have been proposed to link the target genes likely regulated by a TF, each one providing a different level of evidence. The most established ones are (1) manually curated repositories, (2) interactions derived from ChIP-seq binding data, (3) in silico prediction of TF binding on gene promoters, and (4) reverse-engineered regulons from large gene expression data sets. However, it is not known how these different sources of regulons affect the TF activity estimations and, thereby, downstream analysis and interpretation. Here we compared the accuracy and biases of these strategies to define human TF regulons by means of their ability to predict changes in TF activities in three reference benchmark data sets. We assembled a collection of TF-target interactions for 1541 human TFs and evaluated how different molecular and regulatory properties of the TFs, such as the DNA-binding domain, specificities, or mode of interaction with the chromatin, affect the predictions of TF activity. We assessed their coverage and found little overlap on the regulons derived from each strategy and better performance by literature-curated informa

PMID 37843125 :: Expanding the coverage of regulons from high-confidence prior knowledge for accurate estimation of transcription factor activities.
   ABS: Gene regulation plays a critical role in the cellular processes that underlie human health and disease. The regulatory relationship between transcription factors (TFs), key regulators of gene expression, and their target genes, the so called TF regulons, can be coupled with computational algorithms to estimate the activity of TFs. However, to interpret these findings accurately, regulons of high reliability and coverage are needed. In this study, we present and evaluate a collection of regulons created using the CollecTRI meta-resource containing signed TF-gene interactions for 1186 TFs. In this context, we introduce a workflow to integrate information from multiple resources and assign the sign of regulation to TF-gene interactions that could be applied to other comprehensive knowledge bases. We find that the signed CollecTRI-derived regulons outperform other public collections of regulatory interactions in accurately inferring changes in TF activities in perturbation experiments. Furthermore, we showcase the value of the regulons by examining TF activity profiles in three different cancer types and exploring TF activities at the level of single-cells. Overall, the CollecTRI-derived TF regulons enable the accurate and comprehensive estimation of TF activities and thereby help to interpret transcriptomics data.

PMID 26424082 :: RegNetwork: an integrated database of transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulatory networks in human and mouse.
   ABS: Transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression is of fundamental importance to numerous biological processes. Nowadays, an increasing amount of gene regulatory relationships have been documented in various databases and literature. However, to more efficiently exploit such knowledge for biomedical research and applications, it is necessary to construct a genome-wide regulatory network database to integrate the information on gene regulatory relationships that are widely scattered in many different places. Therefore, in this work, we build a knowledge-based database, named 'RegNetwork', of gene regulatory networks for human and mouse by collecting and integrating the documented regulatory interactions among transcription factors (TFs), microRNAs (miRNAs) and target genes from 25 selected databases. Moreover, we also inferred and incorporated potential regulatory relationships based on transcription factor binding site (TFBS) motifs into RegNetwork. As a result, RegNetwork contains a comprehensive set of experimentally observed or predicted transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulatory relationships, and the database framework is flexibly designed for potential extensions to include gene regulatory networks for other organisms in the future. Based on RegNetwork, we characterized the statistical and topological properties of genome-wide regulatory net

PMID 30445619 :: GTRD: a database on gene transcription regulation-2019 update.
   ABS: The current version of the Gene Transcription Regulation Database (GTRD; http://gtrd.biouml.org) contains information about: (i) transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) and transcription coactivators identified by ChIP-seq experiments for Homo sapiens, Mus musculus, Rattus norvegicus, Danio rerio, Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Arabidopsis thaliana; (ii) regions of open chromatin and TFBSs (DNase footprints) identified by DNase-seq; (iii) unmappable regions where TFBSs cannot be identified due to repeats; (iv) potential TFBSs for both human and mouse using position weight matrices from the HOCOMOCO database. Raw ChIP-seq and DNase-seq data were obtained from ENCODE and SRA, and uniformly processed. ChIP-seq peaks were called using four different methods: MACS, SISSRs, GEM and PICS. Moreover, peaks for the same factor and peak calling method, albeit using different experiment conditions (cell line, treatment, etc.), were merged into clusters. To reduce noise, such clusters for different peak calling methods were merged into meta-clusters; these were considered to be non-redundant TFBS sets. Moreover, extended quality control was applied to all ChIP-seq data. Web interface to access GTRD was developed using the BioUML platform. It provides browsing and displaying information, advanced search possibilitie

PMID 36124642 :: TFLink: an integrated gateway to access transcription factor-target gene interactions for multiple species.
   ABS: Analysis of transcriptional regulatory interactions and their comparisons across multiple species are crucial for progress in various fields in biology, from functional genomics to the evolution of signal transduction pathways. However, despite the rapidly growing body of data on regulatory interactions in several eukaryotes, no databases exist to provide curated high-quality information on transcription factor-target gene interactions for multiple species. Here, we address this gap by introducing the TFLink gateway, which uniquely provides experimentally explored and highly accurate information on transcription factor-target gene interactions (∼12 million), nucleotide sequences and genomic locations of transcription factor binding sites (∼9 million) for human and six model organisms: mouse, rat, zebrafish, fruit fly, worm and yeast by integrating 10 resources. TFLink provides user-friendly access to data on transcription factor-target gene interactions, interactive network visualizations and transcription factor binding sites, with cross-links to several other databases. Besides containing accurate information on transcription factors, with a clear labelling of the type/volume of the experiments (small-scale or high-throughput), the source database and the original publications, TFLink also provides a wealth of standardized regulatory data available for download in multiple fo

PMID 31598675 :: KnockTF: a comprehensive human gene expression profile database with knockdown/knockout of transcription factors.
   ABS: Transcription factors (TFs) and their target genes have important functions in human diseases and biological processes. Gene expression profile analysis before and after knockdown or knockout is one of the most important strategies for obtaining target genes of TFs and exploring TF functions. Human gene expression profile datasets with TF knockdown and knockout are accumulating rapidly. Based on the urgent need to comprehensively and effectively collect and process these data, we developed KnockTF (http://www.licpathway.net/KnockTF/index.html), a comprehensive human gene expression profile database of TF knockdown and knockout. KnockTF provides a number of resources for human gene expression profile datasets associated with TF knockdown and knockout and annotates TFs and their target genes in a tissue/cell type-specific manner. The current version of KnockTF has 570 manually curated RNA-seq and microarray datasets associated with 308 TFs disrupted by different knockdown and knockout techniques and across multiple tissue/cell types. KnockTF collects upstream pathway information of TFs and functional annotation results of downstream target genes. It provides details about TFs binding to promoters, super-enhancers and typical enhancers of target genes. KnockTF constructs a TF-differentially expressed gene network and performs network analyses for genes of interest. KnockTF will he

PMID 37956336 :: KnockTF 2.0: a comprehensive gene expression profile database with knockdown/knockout of transcription (co-)factors in multiple species.
   ABS: Transcription factors (TFs), transcription co-factors (TcoFs) and their target genes perform essential functions in diseases and biological processes. KnockTF 2.0 (http://www.licpathway.net/KnockTF/index.html) aims to provide comprehensive gene expression profile datasets before/after T(co)F knockdown/knockout across multiple tissue/cell types of different species. Compared with KnockTF 1.0, KnockTF 2.0 has the following improvements: (i) Newly added T(co)F knockdown/knockout datasets in mice, Arabidopsis thaliana and Zea mays and also an expanded scale of datasets in humans. Currently, KnockTF 2.0 stores 1468 manually curated RNA-seq and microarray datasets associated with 612 TFs and 172 TcoFs disrupted by different knockdown/knockout techniques, which are 2.5 times larger than those of KnockTF 1.0. (ii) Newly added (epi)genetic annotations for T(co)F target genes in humans and mice, such as super-enhancers, common SNPs, methylation sites and chromatin interactions. (iii) Newly embedded and updated search and analysis tools, including T(co)F Enrichment (GSEA), Pathway Downstream Analysis and Search by Target Gene (BLAST). KnockTF 2.0 is a comprehensive update of KnockTF 1.0, which provides more T(co)F knockdown/knockout datasets and (epi)genetic annotations across multiple species than KnockTF 1.0. KnockTF 2.0 facilitates not only the identification of functional T(co)Fs and 

PMID 35325188 :: ChIP-Atlas 2021 update: a data-mining suite for exploring epigenomic landscapes by fully integrating ChIP-seq, ATAC-seq and Bisulfite-seq data.
   ABS: ChIP-Atlas (https://chip-atlas.org) is a web service providing both GUI- and API-based data-mining tools to reveal the architecture of the transcription regulatory landscape. ChIP-Atlas is powered by comprehensively integrating all data sets from high-throughput ChIP-seq and DNase-seq, a method for profiling chromatin regions accessible to DNase. In this update, we further collected all the ATAC-seq and whole-genome bisulfite-seq data for six model organisms (human, mouse, rat, fruit fly, nematode, and budding yeast) with the latest genome assemblies. These together with ChIP-seq data can be visualized with the Peak Browser tool and a genome browser to explore the epigenomic landscape of a query genomic locus, such as its chromatin accessibility, DNA methylation status, and protein-genome interactions. This epigenomic landscape can also be characterized for multiple genes and genomic loci by querying with the Enrichment Analysis tool, which, for example, revealed that inflammatory bowel disease-associated SNPs are the most significantly hypo-methylated in neutrophils. Therefore, ChIP-Atlas provides a panoramic view of the whole epigenomic landscape. All datasets are free to download via either a simple button on the web page or an API.

PMID 38749504 :: ChIP-Atlas 3.0: a data-mining suite to explore chromosome architecture together with large-scale regulome data.
   ABS: ChIP-Atlas (https://chip-atlas.org/) presents a suite of data-mining tools for analyzing epigenomic landscapes, powered by the comprehensive integration of over 376 000 public ChIP-seq, ATAC-seq, DNase-seq and Bisulfite-seq experiments from six representative model organisms. To unravel the intricacies of chromatin architecture that mediates the regulome-initiated generation of transcriptional and phenotypic diversity within cells, we report ChIP-Atlas 3.0 that enhances clarity by incorporating additional tracks for genomic and epigenomic features within a newly consolidated 'annotation track' section. The tracks include chromosomal conformation (Hi-C and eQTL datasets), transcriptional regulatory elements (ChromHMM and FANTOM5 enhancers), and genomic variants associated with diseases and phenotypes (GWAS SNPs and ClinVar variants). These annotation tracks are easily accessible alongside other experimental tracks, facilitating better elucidation of chromatin architecture underlying the diversification of transcriptional and phenotypic traits. Furthermore, 'Diff Analysis,' a new online tool, compares the query epigenome data to identify differentially bound, accessible, and methylated regions using ChIP-seq, ATAC-seq and DNase-seq, and Bisulfite-seq datasets, respectively. The integration of annotation tracks and the Diff Analysis tool, coupled with continuous data expansion, re

PMID 30462313 :: Cistrome Data Browser: expanded datasets and new tools for gene regulatory analysis.
   ABS: The Cistrome Data Browser (DB) is a resource of human and mouse cis-regulatory information derived from ChIP-seq, DNase-seq and ATAC-seq chromatin profiling assays, which map the genome-wide locations of transcription factor binding sites, histone post-translational modifications and regions of chromatin accessible to endonuclease activity. Currently, the Cistrome DB contains approximately 47,000 human and mouse samples with about 24,000 newly collected datasets compared to the previous release two years ago. Furthermore, the Cistrome DB has a new Toolkit module with several features that allow users to better utilize the large-scale ChIP-seq, DNase-seq, and ATAC-seq data. First, users can query the factors which are likely to regulate a specific gene of interest. Second, the Cistrome DB Toolkit facilitates searches for factor binding, histone modifications, and chromatin accessibility in any given genomic interval shorter than 2Mb. Third, the Toolkit can determine the most similar ChIP-seq, DNase-seq, and ATAC-seq samples in terms of genomic interval overlaps with user-provided genomic interval sets. The Cistrome DB is a user-friendly, up-to-date, and well maintained resource, and the new tools will greatly benefit the biomedical research community. The database is freely available at http://cistrome.org/db, and the Toolkit is at http://dbtoolkit.cistrome.org.

PMID 34986601 :: TF-Marker: a comprehensive manually curated database for transcription factors and related markers in specific cell and tissue types in human.
   ABS: Transcription factors (TFs) play key roles in biological processes and are usually used as cell markers. The emerging importance of TFs and related markers in identifying specific cell types in human diseases increases the need for a comprehensive collection of human TFs and related markers sets. Here, we developed the TF-Marker database (TF-Marker, http://bio.liclab.net/TF-Marker/), aiming to provide cell/tissue-specific TFs and related markers for human. By manually curating thousands of published literature, 5905 entries including information about TFs and related markers were classified into five types according to their functions: (i) TF: TFs which regulate expression of the markers; (ii) T Marker: markers which are regulated by the TF; (iii) I Marker: markers which influence the activity of TFs; (iv) TFMarker: TFs which play roles as markers and (v) TF Pmarker: TFs which play roles as potential markers. The 5905 entries of TF-Marker include 1316 TFs, 1092 T Markers, 473 I Markers, 1600 TFMarkers and 1424 TF Pmarkers, involving 383 cell types and 95 tissue types in human. TF-Marker further provides a user-friendly interface to browse, query and visualize the detailed information about TFs and related markers. We believe TF-Marker will become a valuable resource to understand the regulation patterns of different tissues and cells.

PMID 34508353 :: GRAND: a database of gene regulatory network models across human conditions.
   ABS: Gene regulation plays a fundamental role in shaping tissue identity, function, and response to perturbation. Regulatory processes are controlled by complex networks of interacting elements, including transcription factors, miRNAs and their target genes. The structure of these networks helps to determine phenotypes and can ultimately influence the development of disease or response to therapy. We developed GRAND (https://grand.networkmedicine.org) as a database for computationally-inferred, context-specific gene regulatory network models that can be compared between biological states, or used to predict which drugs produce changes in regulatory network structure. The database includes 12 468 genome-scale networks covering 36 human tissues, 28 cancers, 1378 unperturbed cell lines, as well as 173 013 TF and gene targeting scores for 2858 small molecule-induced cell line perturbation paired with phenotypic information. GRAND allows the networks to be queried using phenotypic information and visualized using a variety of interactive tools. In addition, it includes a web application that matches disease states to potentially therapeutic small molecule drugs using regulatory network properties.

PMID 29069589 :: Understanding Tissue-Specific Gene Regulation.
   ABS: Although all human tissues carry out common processes, tissues are distinguished by gene expression patterns, implying that distinct regulatory programs control tissue specificity. In this study, we investigate gene expression and regulation across 38 tissues profiled in the Genotype-Tissue Expression project. We find that network edges (transcription factor to target gene connections) have higher tissue specificity than network nodes (genes) and that regulating nodes (transcription factors) are less likely to be expressed in a tissue-specific manner as compared to their targets (genes). Gene set enrichment analysis of network targeting also indicates that the regulation of tissue-specific function is largely independent of transcription factor expression. In addition, tissue-specific genes are not highly targeted in their corresponding tissue network. However, they do assume bottleneck positions due to variability in transcription factor targeting and the influence of non-canonical regulatory interactions. These results suggest that tissue specificity is driven by context-dependent regulatory paths, providing transcriptional control of tissue-specific processes.

PMID 25915600 :: Understanding multicellular function and disease with human tissue-specific networks.
   ABS: Tissue and cell-type identity lie at the core of human physiology and disease. Understanding the genetic underpinnings of complex tissues and individual cell lineages is crucial for developing improved diagnostics and therapeutics. We present genome-wide functional interaction networks for 144 human tissues and cell types developed using a data-driven Bayesian methodology that integrates thousands of diverse experiments spanning tissue and disease states. Tissue-specific networks predict lineage-specific responses to perturbation, identify the changing functional roles of genes across tissues and illuminate relationships among diseases. We introduce NetWAS, which combines genes with nominally significant genome-wide association study (GWAS) P values and tissue-specific networks to identify disease-gene associations more accurately than GWAS alone. Our webserver, GIANT, provides an interface to human tissue networks through multi-gene queries, network visualization, analysis tools including NetWAS and downloadable networks. GIANT enables systematic exploration of the landscape of interacting genes that shape specialized cellular functions across more than a hundred human tissues and cell types.

PMID 32728249 :: Expanded encyclopaedias of DNA elements in the human and mouse genomes.
   ABS: The human and mouse genomes contain instructions that specify RNAs and proteins and govern the timing, magnitude, and cellular context of their production. To better delineate these elements, phase III of the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) Project has expanded analysis of the cell and tissue repertoires of RNA transcription, chromatin structure and modification, DNA methylation, chromatin looping, and occupancy by transcription factors and RNA-binding proteins. Here we summarize these efforts, which have produced 5,992 new experimental datasets, including systematic determinations across mouse fetal development. All data are available through the ENCODE data portal (https://www.encodeproject.org), including phase II ENCODE1 and Roadmap Epigenomics2 data. We have developed a registry of 926,535 human and 339,815 mouse candidate cis-regulatory elements, covering 7.9 and 3.4% of their respective genomes, by integrating selected datatypes associated with gene regulation, and constructed a web-based server (SCREEN; http://screen.encodeproject.org) to provide flexible, user-defined access to this resource. Collectively, the ENCODE data and registry provide an expansive resource for the scientific community to build a better understanding of the organization and function of the human and mouse genomes.

PMID 31680165 :: The DisGeNET knowledge platform for disease genomics: 2019 update.
   ABS: One of the most pressing challenges in genomic medicine is to understand the role played by genetic variation in health and disease. Thanks to the exploration of genomic variants at large scale, hundreds of thousands of disease-associated loci have been uncovered. However, the identification of variants of clinical relevance is a significant challenge that requires comprehensive interrogation of previous knowledge and linkage to new experimental results. To assist in this complex task, we created DisGeNET (http://www.disgenet.org/), a knowledge management platform integrating and standardizing data about disease associated genes and variants from multiple sources, including the scientific literature. DisGeNET covers the full spectrum of human diseases as well as normal and abnormal traits. The current release covers more than 24 000 diseases and traits, 17 000 genes and 117 000 genomic variants. The latest developments of DisGeNET include new sources of data, novel data attributes and prioritization metrics, a redesigned web interface and recently launched APIs. Thanks to the data standardization, the combination of expert curated information with data automatically mined from the scientific literature, and a suite of tools for accessing its publicly available data, DisGeNET is an interoperable resource supporting a variety of applications in genomic medicine and drug R&D.

PMID 39657122 :: Open Targets Platform: facilitating therapeutic hypotheses building in drug discovery.
   ABS: The Open Targets Platform (https://platform.opentargets.org) is a unique, open-source, publicly-available knowledge base providing data and tooling for systematic drug target identification, annotation, and prioritisation. Since our last report, we have expanded the scope of the Platform through a number of significant enhancements and data updates, with the aim to enable our users to formulate more flexible and impactful therapeutic hypotheses. In this context, we have completely revamped our target-disease associations page with more interactive facets and built-in functionalities to empower users with additional control over their experience using the Platform, and added a new Target Prioritisation view. This enables users to prioritise targets based upon clinical precedence, tractability, doability and safety attributes. We have also implemented a direction of effect assessment for eight sources of target-disease association evidence, showing the effect of genetic variation on the function of a target is associated with risk or protection for a trait to inform on potential mechanisms of modulation suitable for disease treatment. These enhancements and the introduction of new back and front-end technologies to support them have increased the impact and usability of our resource within the drug discovery community.

PMID 30247620 :: The Comparative Toxicogenomics Database: update 2019.
   ABS: The Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD; http://ctdbase.org/) is a premier public resource for literature-based, manually curated associations between chemicals, gene products, phenotypes, diseases, and environmental exposures. In this biennial update, we present our new chemical-phenotype module that codes chemical-induced effects on phenotypes, curated using controlled vocabularies for chemicals, phenotypes, taxa, and anatomical descriptors; this module provides unique opportunities to explore cellular and system-level phenotypes of the pre-disease state and allows users to construct predictive adverse outcome pathways (linking chemical-gene molecular initiating events with phenotypic key events, diseases, and population-level health outcomes). We also report a 46% increase in CTD manually curated content, which when integrated with other datasets yields more than 38 million toxicogenomic relationships. We describe new querying and display features for our enhanced chemical-exposure science module, providing greater scope of content and utility. As well, we discuss an updated MEDIC disease vocabulary with over 1700 new terms and accession identifiers. To accommodate these increases in data content and functionality, CTD has upgraded its computational infrastructure. These updates continue to improve CTD and help inform new testable hypotheses about the etiology and mecha

PMID 36914875 :: Multi-ancestry genome-wide association analyses improve resolution of genes and pathways influencing lung function and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease risk.
   ABS: Lung-function impairment underlies chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and predicts mortality. In the largest multi-ancestry genome-wide association meta-analysis of lung function to date, comprising 580,869 participants, we identified 1,020 independent association signals implicating 559 genes supported by ≥2 criteria from a systematic variant-to-gene mapping framework. These genes were enriched in 29 pathways. Individual variants showed heterogeneity across ancestries, age and smoking groups, and collectively as a genetic risk score showed strong association with COPD across ancestry groups. We undertook phenome-wide association studies for selected associated variants as well as trait and pathway-specific genetic risk scores to infer possible consequences of intervening in pathways underlying lung function. We highlight new putative causal variants, genes, proteins and pathways, including those targeted by existing drugs. These findings bring us closer to understanding the mechanisms underlying lung function and COPD, and should inform functional genomics experiments and potentially future COPD therapies.

