PMID 33947861 :: Differential chromatin binding of the lung lineage transcription factor NKX2-1 resolves opposing murine alveolar cell fates in vivo.
   Differential transcription of identical DNA sequences leads to distinct tissue lineages and then multiple cell types within a lineage, an epigenetic process central to progenitor and stem cell biology. The associated genome-wide changes, especially in native tissues, remain insufficiently understood, and are hereby addressed in the mouse lung, where the same lineage transcription factor NKX2-1 promotes the diametrically opposed alveolar type 1 (AT1) and AT2 cell fates. Here, we report that the cell-type-specific function of NKX2-1 is attributed to its differential chromatin binding that is acquired or retained during development in coordination with partner transcriptional factors. Loss of YAP/TAZ redirects NKX2-1 from its AT1-specific to AT2-specific binding sites, leading to transcriptionally exaggerated AT2 cells when deleted in progenitors or AT1-to-AT2 conversion when deleted after fate commitment. Nkx2-1 mutant AT1 and AT2 cells gain distinct chromatin accessible sites, including those specific to the opposite fate while adopting a gastrointestinal fate, suggesting an epigeneti

PMID 31548395 :: Transcriptional control of lung alveolar type 1 cell development and maintenance by NK homeobox 2-1.
   The extraordinarily thin alveolar type 1 (AT1) cell constitutes nearly the entire gas exchange surface and allows passive diffusion of oxygen into the blood stream. Despite such an essential role, the transcriptional network controlling AT1 cells remains unclear. Using cell-specific knockout mouse models, genomic profiling, and 3D imaging, we found that NK homeobox 2-1 (Nkx2-1) is expressed in AT1 cells and is required for the development and maintenance of AT1 cells. Without Nkx2-1, developing AT1 cells lose 3 defining features-molecular markers, expansive morphology, and cellular quiescence-leading to alveolar simplification and lethality. NKX2-1 is also cell-autonomously required for the same 3 defining features in mature AT1 cells. Intriguingly, Nkx2-1 mutant AT1 cells activate gastrointestinal (GI) genes and form dense microvilli-like structures apically. Single-cell RNA-seq supports a linear transformation of Nkx2-1 mutant AT1 cells toward a GI fate. Whole lung ChIP-seq shows NKX2-1 binding to 68% of genes that are down-regulated upon Nkx2-1 deletion, including 93% of known AT1

PMID 33980985 :: CRISPRi-mediated functional analysis of NKX2-1-binding sites in the lung.
   The transcription factor NKX2-1/TTF-1 is involved in lung pathophysiology, including breathing, innate defense and tumorigenesis. To understand the mechanism by which NKX2-1 regulates genes involved in such pathophysiology, we have previously performed ChIP-seq and identified genome-wide NKX2-1-binding sites, which revealed that NKX2-1 binds to not only proximal promoter regions but also multiple intra- and inter-genic regions of the genes regulated by NKX2-1. However, the roles of such regions, especially non-proximal ones, bound by NKX2-1 have not yet been determined. Here, using CRISPRi (CRISPR/dCas9-KRAB), we scrutinize the functional roles of 19 regions/sites bound by NKX2-1, which are located in genes involved in breathing and innate defense (SFTPB, LAMP3, SFTPA1, SFTPA2) and lung tumorigenesis (MYBPH, LMO3, CD274/PD-L1). Notably, the CRISPRi approach reveals that a portion of NKX2-1-binding sites are functionally indispensable while the rest are dispensable for the expression of the genes, indicating that functional roles of NKX2-1-binding sites are unequally yoked.

PMID 32500120 :: CRISPRi-mediated functional analysis of lung disease-associated loci at non-coding regions.
   Genome-wide association studies have identified lung disease-associated loci; however, the functions of such loci are not well understood in part because the majority of such loci are located at non-coding regions. Hi-C, ChIP-seq and eQTL data predict potential roles (e.g. enhancer) of such loci; however, they do not elucidate the molecular function. To determine whether these loci function as gene-regulatory regions, CRISPR interference (CRISPRi; CRISPR/dCas9-KRAB) has been recently used. Here, we applied CRISPRi along with Hi-C, ChIP-seq and eQTL to determine the functional roles of loci established as highly associated with asthma, cystic fibrosis (CF), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Notably, Hi-C, ChIP-seq and eQTL predicted that non-coding regions located at chromosome 19q13 or chromosome 17q21 harboring single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) linked to asthma/CF/COPD and chromosome 11p15 harboring an SNP linked to IPF interact with nearby genes and function as enhancers; however, CRISPRi indicated that the regions with rs180

PMID 31782890 :: Comparative analysis of TTF-1 binding DNA regions in small-cell lung cancer and non-small-cell lung cancer.
   Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1, encoded by the NKX2-1 gene) is highly expressed in small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) and lung adenocarcinoma (LADC), but how its functional roles differ between SCLC and LADC remains to be elucidated. Here, we compared the genome-wide distributions of TTF-1 binding regions and the transcriptional programs regulated by TTF-1 between NCI-H209 (H209), a human SCLC cell line, and NCI-H441 (H441), a human LADC cell line, using chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq) and RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq). TTF-1 binding regions in H209 and H441 cells differed by 75.0% and E-box motifs were highly enriched exclusively in the TTF-1 binding regions of H209 cells. Transcriptome profiling revealed that TTF-1 is involved in neuroendocrine differentiation in H209 cells. We report that TTF-1 and achaete-scute homolog 1 (ASCL1, also known as ASH1, an E-box binding basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, and a lineage-survival oncogene of SCLC) are coexpressed and bound to adjacent sites on target genes expressed in SCLC, and cooperatively regulate transc

PMID 27452466 :: ASCL1 and NEUROD1 Reveal Heterogeneity in Pulmonary Neuroendocrine Tumors and Regulate Distinct Genetic Programs.
   Small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) is a high-grade pulmonary neuroendocrine tumor. The transcription factors ASCL1 and NEUROD1 play crucial roles in promoting malignant behavior and survival of human SCLC cell lines. Here, we find that ASCL1 and NEUROD1 identify heterogeneity in SCLC, bind distinct genomic loci, and regulate mostly distinct genes. ASCL1, but not NEUROD1, is present in mouse pulmonary neuroendocrine cells, and only ASCL1 is required in vivo for tumor formation in mouse models of SCLC. ASCL1 targets oncogenic genes including MYCL1, RET, SOX2, and NFIB while NEUROD1 targets MYC. ASCL1 and NEUROD1 regulate different genes that commonly contribute to neuronal function. ASCL1 also regulates multiple genes in the NOTCH pathway including DLL3. Together, ASCL1 and NEUROD1 distinguish heterogeneity in SCLC with distinct genomic landscapes and distinct gene expression programs.

PMID 27374332 :: Nfib Promotes Metastasis through a Widespread Increase in Chromatin Accessibility.
   Metastases are the main cause of cancer deaths, but the mechanisms underlying metastatic progression remain poorly understood. We isolated pure populations of cancer cells from primary tumors and metastases from a genetically engineered mouse model of human small cell lung cancer (SCLC) to investigate the mechanisms that drive the metastatic spread of this lethal cancer. Genome-wide characterization of chromatin accessibility revealed the opening of large numbers of distal regulatory elements across the genome during metastatic progression. These changes correlate with copy number amplification of the Nfib locus, and differentially accessible sites were highly enriched for Nfib transcription factor binding sites. Nfib is necessary and sufficient to increase chromatin accessibility at a large subset of the intergenic regions. Nfib promotes pro-metastatic neuronal gene expression programs and drives the metastatic ability of SCLC cells. The identification of widespread chromatin changes during SCLC progression reveals an unexpected global reprogramming during metastatic progression.

PMID 32473656 :: MYC Drives Temporal Evolution of Small Cell Lung Cancer Subtypes by Reprogramming Neuroendocrine Fate.
   Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a neuroendocrine tumor treated clinically as a single disease with poor outcomes. Distinct SCLC molecular subtypes have been defined based on expression of ASCL1, NEUROD1, POU2F3, or YAP1. Here, we use mouse and human models with a time-series single-cell transcriptome analysis to reveal that MYC drives dynamic evolution of SCLC subtypes. In neuroendocrine cells, MYC activates Notch to dedifferentiate tumor cells, promoting a temporal shift in SCLC from ASCL1+ to NEUROD1+ to YAP1+ states. MYC alternatively promotes POU2F3+ tumors from a distinct cell type. Human SCLC exhibits intratumoral subtype heterogeneity, suggesting that this dynamic evolution occurs in patient tumors. These findings suggest that genetics, cell of origin, and tumor cell plasticity determine SCLC subtype.

PMID 35848993 :: Transcriptional Circuitry of NKX2-1 and SOX1 Defines an Unrecognized Lineage Subtype of Small-Cell Lung Cancer.
   Rationale: The current molecular classification of small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) on the basis of the expression of four lineage transcription factors still leaves its major subtype SCLC-A as a heterogeneous group, necessitating more precise characterization of lineage subclasses. Objectives: To refine the current SCLC classification with epigenomic profiles and to identify features of the redefined SCLC subtypes. Methods: We performed unsupervised clustering of epigenomic profiles on 25 SCLC cell lines. Functional significance of NKX2-1 (NK2 homeobox 1) was evaluated by cell growth, apoptosis, and xenograft using clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats-Cas9 (CRISPR-associated protein 9)-mediated deletion. NKX2-1-specific cistromic profiles were determined using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing, and its functional transcriptional partners were determined using coimmunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry. Rb1flox/flox; Trp53flox/flox and Rb1flox/flox; Trp53flox/flox; Nkx2-1flox/flox mouse models were engineered to explore the function of Nk

PMID 31551362 :: Epigenomic Profiling Discovers Trans-lineage SOX2 Partnerships Driving Tumor Heterogeneity in Lung Squamous Cell Carcinoma.
   Molecular characterization of lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC), one of the major subtypes of lung cancer, has not sufficiently improved its nonstratified treatment strategies over decades. Accumulating evidence suggests that lineage-specific transcriptional regulators control differentiation states during cancer evolution and underlie their distinct biological behaviors. In this study, by investigating the super-enhancer landscape of LUSC, we identified a previously undescribed "neural" subtype defined by Sox2 and a neural lineage factor Brn2, as well as the classical LUSC subtype defined by Sox2 and its classical squamous partner p63. Robust protein-protein interaction and genomic cooccupancy of Sox2 and Brn2, in place for p63 in the classical LUSC, indicated their transcriptional cooperation imparting this unique lineage state in the "neural" LUSC. Forced expression of p63 downregulated Brn2 in the "neural" LUSC cells and invoked the classical LUSC lineage with more squamous/epithelial features, which were accompanied by increased activities of ErbB/Akt and MAPK-ERK pathways, su

PMID 35105868 :: ΔNp63 regulates a common landscape of enhancer associated genes in non-small cell lung cancer.
   Distinct lung stem cells give rise to lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC). ΔNp63, the p53 family member and p63 isoform, guides the maturation of these stem cells through the regulation of their self-renewal and terminal differentiation; however, the underlying mechanistic role regulated by ∆Np63 in lung cancer development has remained elusive. By utilizing a ΔNp63-specific conditional knockout mouse model and xenograft models of LUAD and LUSC, we found that ∆Np63 promotes non-small cell lung cancer by maintaining the lung stem cells necessary for lung cancer cell initiation and progression in quiescence. ChIP-seq analysis of lung basal cells, alveolar type 2 (AT2) cells, and LUAD reveals robust ∆Np63 regulation of a common landscape of enhancers of cell identity genes. Importantly, one of these genes, BCL9L, is among the enhancer associated genes regulated by ∆Np63 in Kras-driven LUAD and mediates the oncogenic effects of ∆Np63 in both LUAD and LUSC. Accordingly, high BCL9L levels correlate with poor prognosis in LUAD patients. Taken together, our findings 

PMID 30475207 :: FoxA1 and FoxA2 drive gastric differentiation and suppress squamous identity in NKX2-1-negative lung cancer.
   Changes in cancer cell identity can alter malignant potential and therapeutic response. Loss of the pulmonary lineage specifier NKX2-1 augments the growth of KRAS-driven lung adenocarcinoma and causes pulmonary to gastric transdifferentiation. Here, we show that the transcription factors FoxA1 and FoxA2 are required for initiation of mucinous NKX2-1-negative lung adenocarcinomas in the mouse and for activation of their gastric differentiation program. Foxa1/2 deletion severely impairs tumor initiation and causes a proximal shift in cellular identity, yielding tumors expressing markers of the squamocolumnar junction of the gastrointestinal tract. In contrast, we observe downregulation of FoxA1/2 expression in the squamous component of both murine and human lung adenosquamous carcinoma. Using sequential in vivo recombination, we find that FoxA1/2 loss in established KRAS-driven neoplasia originating from SPC-positive alveolar cells induces keratinizing squamous cell carcinomas. Thus, NKX2-1, FoxA1 and FoxA2 coordinately regulate the growth and identity of lung cancer in a context-speci

PMID 33821796 :: An NKX2-1/ERK/WNT feedback loop modulates gastric identity and response to targeted therapy in lung adenocarcinoma.
   Cancer cells undergo lineage switching during natural progression and in response to therapy. NKX2-1 loss in human and murine lung adenocarcinoma leads to invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (IMA), a lung cancer subtype that exhibits gastric differentiation and harbors a distinct spectrum of driver oncogenes. In murine BRAFV600E-driven lung adenocarcinoma, NKX2-1 is required for early tumorigenesis, but dispensable for established tumor growth. NKX2-1-deficient, BRAFV600E-driven tumors resemble human IMA and exhibit a distinct response to BRAF/MEK inhibitors. Whereas BRAF/MEK inhibitors drive NKX2-1-positive tumor cells into quiescence, NKX2-1-negative cells fail to exit the cell cycle after the same therapy. BRAF/MEK inhibitors induce cell identity switching in NKX2-1-negative lung tumors within the gastric lineage, which is driven in part by WNT signaling and FoxA1/2. These data elucidate a complex, reciprocal relationship between lineage specifiers and oncogenic signaling pathways in the regulation of lung adenocarcinoma identity that is likely to impact lineage-specific therapeutic 

PMID 30332632 :: The Lineage-Defining Transcription Factors SOX2 and NKX2-1 Determine Lung Cancer Cell Fate and Shape the Tumor Immune Microenvironment.
   The major types of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)-squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma-have distinct immune microenvironments. We developed a genetic model of squamous NSCLC on the basis of overexpression of the transcription factor Sox2, which specifies lung basal cell fate, and loss of the tumor suppressor Lkb1 (SL mice). SL tumors recapitulated gene-expression and immune-infiltrate features of human squamous NSCLC; such features included enrichment of tumor-associated neutrophils (TANs) and decreased expression of NKX2-1, a transcriptional regulator that specifies alveolar cell fate. In Kras-driven adenocarcinomas, mis-expression of Sox2 or loss of Nkx2-1 led to TAN recruitment. TAN recruitment involved SOX2-mediated production of the chemokine CXCL5. Deletion of Nkx2-1 in SL mice (SNL) revealed that NKX2-1 suppresses SOX2-driven squamous tumorigenesis by repressing adeno-to-squamous transdifferentiation. Depletion of TANs in SNL mice reduced squamous tumors, suggesting that TANs foster squamous cell fate. Thus, lineage-defining transcription factors determine the tumor 

PMID 37067057 :: FOXA2 Cooperates with Mutant KRAS to Drive Invasive Mucinous Adenocarcinoma of the Lung.
   The endoderm-lineage transcription factor FOXA2 has been shown to inhibit lung tumorigenesis in in vitro and xenograft studies using lung cancer cell lines. However, FOXA2 expression in primary lung tumors does not correlate with an improved patient survival rate, and the functional role of FOXA2 in primary lung tumors remains elusive. To understand the role of FOXA2 in primary lung tumors in vivo, here, we conditionally induced the expression of FOXA2 along with either of the two major lung cancer oncogenes, EGFRL858R or KRASG12D, in the lung epithelium of transgenic mice. Notably, FOXA2 suppressed autochthonous lung tumor development driven by EGFRL858R, whereas FOXA2 promoted tumor growth driven by KRASG12D. Importantly, FOXA2 expression along with KRASG12D produced invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (IMA) of the lung, a fatal mucus-producing lung cancer comprising approximately 5% of human lung cancer cases. In the mouse model in vivo and human lung cancer cells in vitro, FOXA2 activated a gene regulatory network involved in the key mucous transcription factor SPDEF and upregulated

PMID 31884422 :: Genome-wide global identification of NRF2 binding sites in A549 non-small cell lung cancer cells by ChIP-Seq reveals NRF2 regulation of genes involved in focal adhesion pathways.
   Nuclear factor erythroid-derived-2-like 2(NRF2) regulates its downstream genes through binding with antioxidant responsive elements in their promoter regions. Hyperactivation of NRF2 results in oncogenesis and drug resistance in various cancers including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, identification of the genes and pathways regulated by NRF2 in NSCLC warrants further investigation. We investigated the global NRF2 genomic binding sites using the high-throughput ChIP-Seq technique in KEAP1 (Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1)-mutated A549 (NSCLC) cells. We next carried out an integrated analysis of the ChIP-Seq data with transcriptomic data from A549 cells with NRF2-knockdown and RNA-Seq data from TCGA patients with altered KEAP1 to identify downstream and clinically-correlated genes respectively. Furthermore, we applied transcription factor enrichment analysis, generated a protein-protein interaction network, and used kinase enrichment analysis. Moreover, functional annotation of NRF2 binding sites using DAVID v7 identified the genes involved in focal adhesion. Putativ

PMID 27076634 :: Cistrome-based Cooperation between Airway Epithelial Glucocorticoid Receptor and NF-κB Orchestrates Anti-inflammatory Effects.
   Antagonism of pro-inflammatory transcription factors by monomeric glucocorticoid receptor (GR) has long been viewed as central to glucocorticoid (GC) efficacy. However, the mechanisms and targets through which GCs exert therapeutic effects in diseases such as asthma remain incompletely understood. We previously defined a surprising cooperative interaction between GR and NF-κB that enhanced expression of A20 (TNFAIP3), a potent inhibitor of NF-κB. Here we extend this observation to establish that A20 is required for maximal cytokine repression by GCs. To ascertain the global extent of GR and NF-κB cooperation, we determined genome-wide occupancy of GR, the p65 subunit of NF-κB, and RNA polymerase II in airway epithelial cells treated with dexamethasone, TNF, or both using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by deep sequencing. We found that GR recruits p65 to dimeric GR binding sites across the genome and discovered additional regulatory elements in which GR-p65 cooperation augments gene expression. GR targets regulated by this mechanism include key anti-inflammatory and injury res

PMID 28375666 :: Glucocorticoid Receptor ChIP-Seq Identifies PLCD1 as a KLF15 Target that Represses Airway Smooth Muscle Hypertrophy.
   Glucocorticoids exert important therapeutic effects on airway smooth muscle (ASM), yet few direct targets of glucocorticoid signaling in ASM have been definitively identified. Here, we show that the transcription factor, Krüppel-like factor 15 (KLF15), is directly induced by glucocorticoids in primary human ASM, and that KLF15 represses ASM hypertrophy. We integrated transcriptome data from KLF15 overexpression with genome-wide analysis of RNA polymerase (RNAP) II and glucocorticoid receptor (GR) occupancy to identify phospholipase C delta 1 as both a KLF15-regulated gene and a novel repressor of ASM hypertrophy. Our chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing data also allowed us to establish numerous direct transcriptional targets of GR in ASM. Genes with inducible GR occupancy and putative antiinflammatory properties included IRS2, APPL2, RAMP1, and MFGE8. Surprisingly, we also observed GR occupancy in the absence of supplemental ligand, including robust GR binding peaks within the IL11 and LIF loci. Detection of antibody-GR complexes at these areas was abrogated by dexamethasone tre

PMID 40164603 :: Enhancer RNA transcription pinpoints functional genetic variants linked to asthma.
   Bidirectional enhancer RNA (eRNA) transcription is a widespread response to environmental signals and glucocorticoids. We investigated whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within dynamically regulated eRNA-transcribing regions contribute to genetic variation in asthma. Through applying multivariate regression modeling with permutation-based significance thresholding to a large clinical cohort, we identified novel associations between asthma and 35 SNPs located in eRNA-transcribing regions implicated in regulating cellular processes relevant to asthma, including rs258760 (mean allele frequency = 0.34, asthma odds ratio = 0.95; P = 5.04E-03). We show that rs258760 disrupts an active aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) response element linked to transcriptional regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor gene by AHR ligands, which are commonly found in combusted air pollution. The role of rs258760 as a protective variant for asthma was independently validated using UK Biobank data. Our findings establish eRNA signatures as a tool for discovery of functional genetic variants and defi

PMID 29572268 :: A transcription factor network represses CFTR gene expression in airway epithelial cells.
   Mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene cause the inherited disorder cystic fibrosis (CF). Lung disease is the major cause of CF morbidity, though CFTR expression levels are substantially lower in the airway epithelium than in pancreatic duct and intestinal epithelia, which also show compromised function in CF. Recently developed small molecule therapeutics for CF are highly successful for one specific CFTR mutation and have a positive impact on others. However, the low abundance of CFTR transcripts in the airway limits the opportunity for drugs to correct the defective substrate. Elucidation of the transcriptional mechanisms for the CFTR locus has largely focused on intragenic and intergenic tissue-specific enhancers and their activating trans-factors. Here, we investigate whether the low CFTR levels in the airway epithelium result from the recruitment of repressive proteins directly to the locus. Using an siRNA screen to deplete ∼1500 transcription factors (TFs) and associated regulatory proteins in Calu-3 lung epithelial cells, we identifie

PMID 32432922 :: The FOXA1 transcriptional network coordinates key functions of primary human airway epithelial cells.
   The differentiated functions of the human airway epithelium are coordinated by a complex network of transcription factors. These include the pioneer factors Forkhead box A1 and A2 (FOXA1 and FOXA2), which are well studied in several tissues, but their role in airway epithelial cells is poorly characterized. Here, we define the cistrome of FOXA1 and FOXA2 in primary human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells by chromatin immunoprecipitation with deep-sequencing (ChIP-seq). Next, siRNA-mediated depletion of each factor is used to investigate their transcriptome by RNA-seq. We found that, as predicted from their DNA-binding motifs, genome-wide occupancy of the two factors showed substantial overlap; however, their global impact on gene expression differed. FOXA1 is an abundant transcript in HBE cells, while FOXA2 is expressed at low levels, and both these factors likely exhibit autoregulation and cross-regulation. FOXA1 regulated loci are involved in cell adhesion and the maintenance of epithelial cell identity, particularly through repression of genes associated with epithelial to mesenchy

PMID 33731112 :: Combined genomic and proteomic approaches reveal DNA binding sites and interaction partners of TBX2 in the developing lung.
   Tbx2 encodes a transcriptional repressor implicated in the development of numerous organs in mouse. During lung development TBX2 maintains the proliferation of mesenchymal progenitors, and hence, epithelial proliferation and branching morphogenesis. The pro-proliferative function was traced to direct repression of the cell-cycle inhibitor genes Cdkn1a and Cdkn1b, as well as of genes encoding WNT antagonists, Frzb and Shisa3, to increase pro-proliferative WNT signaling. Despite these important molecular insights, we still lack knowledge of the DNA occupancy of TBX2 in the genome, and of the protein interaction partners involved in transcriptional repression of target genes. We used chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-sequencing and expression analyses to identify genomic DNA-binding sites and transcription units directly regulated by TBX2 in the developing lung. Moreover, we purified TBX2 containing protein complexes from embryonic lung tissue and identified potential interaction partners by subsequent liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry. The interaction with candidate proteins w

PMID 39980707 :: RNA-Seq and ChIP-Seq Identification of Unique and Overlapping Target Genes and Pathways Regulated by TBX4 in Human Pulmonary Fibroblasts and Pericytes.
   Transcription factor TBX4 rare variants associate with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), particularly in children, and are the second most common cause of heritable PAH. However, TBX4's down-stream targets and the molecular and cellular pathways these targets regulate remain largely unknown in PAH. We combined RNA-seq and ChIP-seq results to identify TBX4 direct targets in lung fibroblasts and pericytes, respectively. There were 555 genes with altered expression with TBX4 knockdown in both fibroblasts and pericytes by RNA-seq, and which also were found to be bound by TBX4 by ChIP-seq. Gene ontology analysis found that these were dominated by genes related to extracellular matrix, actin organization, and migration guidance, although there were also significant groups related to serine/threonine kinase signaling, GTPase mediated signaling, and glycoprotein metabolism. Migration and proliferation studies using TBX4 knockdown fibroblasts confirmed functional effects. These studies provide the first insights into how genes and pathways regulated by TBX4 are impacted and inform future

PMID 33320836 :: The MUC5B-associated variant rs35705950 resides within an enhancer subject to lineage- and disease-dependent epigenetic remodeling.
   The G/T transversion rs35705950, located approximately 3 kb upstream of the MUC5B start site, is the cardinal risk factor for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Here, we investigate the function and chromatin structure of this -3 kb region and provide evidence that it functions as a classically defined enhancer subject to epigenetic programming. We use nascent transcript analysis to show that RNA polymerase II loads within 10 bp of the G/T transversion site, definitively establishing enhancer function for the region. By integrating Assay for Transposase-Accessible Chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq) analysis of fresh and cultured human airway epithelial cells with nuclease sensitivity data, we demonstrate that this region is in accessible chromatin that affects the expression of MUC5B. Through applying paired single-nucleus RNA- and ATAC-seq to frozen tissue from IPF lungs, we extend these findings directly to disease, with results indicating that epigenetic programming of the -3 kb enhancer in IPF occurs in both MUC5B-expressing and nonexpressing lineages. In aggregate, our resu

PMID 36777184 :: Genomic characterization and therapeutic utilization of IL-13-responsive sequences in asthma.
   Epithelial responses to the cytokine interleukin-13 (IL-13) cause airway obstruction in asthma. Here we utilized multiple genomic techniques to identify IL-13-responsive regulatory elements in bronchial epithelial cells and used these data to develop a CRISPR interference (CRISPRi)-based therapeutic approach to downregulate airway obstruction-inducing genes in a cell type- and IL-13-specific manner. Using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and acetylated lysine 27 on histone 3 (H3K27ac) chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) in primary human bronchial epithelial cells, we identified IL-13-responsive genes and regulatory elements. These sequences were functionally validated and optimized via massively parallel reporter assays (MPRAs) for IL-13-inducible activity. The top secretory cell-selective sequence from the MPRA, a novel, distal enhancer of the sterile alpha motif pointed domain containing E-26 transformation-specific transcription factor (SPDEF) gene, was utilized to drive CRISPRi and knock down SPDEF or mucin 5AC (MUC5AC), both involved in pathologic mucus pro

PMID 42228021 :: A signal-responsive cooperative transcription factor network determines alveolar macrophage identity.
   Tissue-resident macrophages receive signals from their microenvironment that coordinate the activity of transcription factors (TFs) to establish distinct transcriptional profiles and identities. However, the molecular mechanisms whereby interactions with other cells of the niche imprint a distinct macrophage identity remain poorly understood. Here, we report that retinoid X receptors (RXRs) determine the differentiation and identity of alveolar macrophages (AM) by regulating chromatin accessibility and transcriptional activity of AM-core and function genes, enabling PPARγ-dependent programs. AM differentiation and maintenance in vivo require RXR upregulation in response to tissue-derived δ-like canonical Notch ligand 4 (DLL4), GM-CSF, and TGF β (TGFβ). Interplay among these signals leads to cooperation between RXRα, RBPJ, STAT5, and SMAD4 for the transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of key AM-core genes. These results underscore the role of RXRs as key TFs that cooperate with other regulatory elements to establish the AM population and determine AM identity.

PMID 34797692 :: The transcription factor EGR2 is indispensable for tissue-specific imprinting of alveolar macrophages in health and tissue repair.
   Alveolar macrophages are the most abundant macrophages in the healthy lung where they play key roles in homeostasis and immune surveillance against airborne pathogens. Tissue-specific differentiation and survival of alveolar macrophages rely on niche-derived factors, such as granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and transforming growth factor–β (TGF-β). However, the nature of the downstream molecular pathways that regulate the identity and function of alveolar macrophages and their response to injury remain poorly understood. Here, we identify that the transcription factor EGR2 is an evolutionarily conserved feature of lung alveolar macrophages and show that cell-intrinsic EGR2 is indispensable for the tissue-specific identity of alveolar macrophages. Mechanistically, we show that EGR2 is driven by TGF-β and GM-CSF in a PPAR-γ–dependent manner to control alveolar macrophage differentiation. Functionally, EGR2 was dispensable for the regulation of lipids in the airways but crucial for the effective handling of the respiratory pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae. Last

PMID 39042472 :: EGR2 is an epigenomic regulator of phagocytosis and antifungal immunity in alveolar macrophages.
   Alveolar macrophages (AMs) act as gatekeepers of the lung's immune responses, serving essential roles in recognizing and eliminating pathogens. The transcription factor (TF) early growth response 2 (EGR2) has been recently described as required for mature AMs in mice; however, its mechanisms of action have not been explored. Here, we identified EGR2 as an epigenomic regulator and likely direct proximal transcriptional activator in AMs using epigenomic approaches (RNA sequencing, ATAC sequencing, and CUT&RUN). The predicted direct proximal targets of EGR2 included a subset of AM identity genes and ones related to pathogen recognition, phagosome maturation, and adhesion, such as Clec7a, Atp6v0d2, Itgb2, Rhoc, and Tmsb10. We provided evidence that EGR2 deficiency led to impaired zymosan internalization and reduced the capacity to respond to Aspergillus fumigatus. Mechanistically, the lack of EGR2 altered the transcriptional response, secreted cytokines (i.e., CXCL11), and inflammation-resolving lipid mediators (i.e., RvE1) of AMs during in vivo zymosan-induced inflammation, which manife

PMID 35210623 :: Long-term culture-expanded alveolar macrophages restore their full epigenetic identity after transfer in vivo.
   Alveolar macrophages (AMs) are lung tissue-resident macrophages that can be expanded in culture, but it is unknown to what extent culture affects their in vivo identity. Here we show that mouse long-term ex vivo expanded AMs (exAMs) maintained a core AM gene expression program, but showed culture adaptations related to adhesion, metabolism and proliferation. Upon transplantation into the lung, exAMs reacquired full transcriptional and epigenetic AM identity, even after several months in culture and could self-maintain long-term in the alveolar niche. Changes in open chromatin regions observed in culture were fully reversible in transplanted exAMs and resulted in a gene expression profile indistinguishable from resident AMs. Our results indicate that long-term proliferation of AMs in culture did not compromise cellular identity in vivo. The robustness of exAM identity provides new opportunities for mechanistic analysis and highlights the therapeutic potential of exAMs.

PMID 37142338 :: Single-nucleus chromatin accessibility identifies a critical role for TWIST1 in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis myofibroblast activity.
   In idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), myofibroblasts are key effectors of fibrosis and architectural distortion by excessive deposition of extracellular matrix and their acquired contractile capacity. Single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) has precisely defined the IPF myofibroblast transcriptome, but identifying critical transcription factor activity by this approach is imprecise. We performed single-nucleus assay for transposase-accessible chromatin sequencing on explanted lungs from patients with IPF (n=3) and donor controls (n=2) and integrated this with a larger scRNA-seq dataset (10 IPF, eight controls) to identify differentially accessible chromatin regions and enriched transcription factor motifs within lung cell populations. We performed RNA-sequencing on pulmonary fibroblasts of bleomycin-injured Twist1-overexpressing COL1A2 Cre-ER mice to examine alterations in fibrosis-relevant pathways following Twist1 overexpression in collagen-producing cells. TWIST1, and other E-box transcription factor motifs, were significantly enriched in open chromatin of IPF myofibroblasts comp

PMID 33362848 :: Profiling of H3K27Ac Reveals the Influence of Asthma on the Epigenome of the Airway Epithelium.
   Asthma is a chronic airway disease driven by complex genetic-environmental interactions. The role of epigenetic modifications in bronchial epithelial cells (BECs) in asthma is poorly understood. We piloted genome-wide profiling of the enhancer-associated histone modification H3K27ac in BECs from people with asthma (n = 4) and healthy controls (n = 3). We identified n = 4,321 (FDR < 0.05) regions exhibiting differential H3K27ac enrichment between asthma and health, clustering at genes associated predominately with epithelial processes (EMT). We identified initial evidence of asthma-associated Super-Enhancers encompassing genes encoding transcription factors (TP63) and enzymes regulating lipid metabolism (PTGS1). We integrated published datasets to identify epithelium-specific transcription factors associated with H3K27ac in asthma (TP73) and identify initial relationships between asthma-associated changes in H3K27ac and transcriptional profiles. Finally, we investigated the potential of CRISPR-based approaches to functionally evaluate H3K27ac-asthma landscape in vitro by identifying g

PMID 42160949 :: Epigenomic profiling of neuroendocrine lung cancers identifies a classical-neuroendocrine ASCL1/NKX2-1 subtype and a SOX11-associated differentiation axis linked to reduced immunogenicity.
   Heterogeneity of neuroendocrine (NE) differentiation in pulmonary high-grade NE carcinoma, mainly small-cell lung cancer (SCLC), has been recently explored based on the expression of lineage transcription factors such as ASCL1, NEUROD1 and POU2F3. However, molecular classification based on these factors remains incomplete, and NE differentiation in lung cancers is more heterogeneous than previously appreciated. Here, we investigated the heterogeneity of NE differentiation using epigenomic profiling across a range of lung cancers with NE components, predominantly large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC). We analyzed super-enhancer profiles of 24 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor tissues from patients with primary lung cancers containing LCNEC components. Associations between epigenomic profiles and NE factors were examined. The functional role of SOX11 was assessed by transcriptomic analysis following CRISPR-Cas9-mediated deletion, as well as by analysis of human LCNEC/SCLC tumor and organoid datasets. We identified a classical NE subtype characterized by high expression of AS

PMID 35058622 :: Massively parallel phenotyping of coding variants in cancer with Perturb-seq.
   Genome sequencing studies have identified millions of somatic variants in cancer, but it remains challenging to predict the phenotypic impact of most. Experimental approaches to distinguish impactful variants often use phenotypic assays that report on predefined gene-specific functional effects in bulk cell populations. Here, we develop an approach to functionally assess variant impact in single cells by pooled Perturb-seq. We measured the impact of 200 TP53 and KRAS variants on RNA profiles in over 300,000 single lung cancer cells, and used the profiles to categorize variants into phenotypic subsets to distinguish gain-of-function, loss-of-function and dominant negative variants, which we validated by comparison with orthogonal assays. We discovered that KRAS variants did not merely fit into discrete functional categories, but spanned a continuum of gain-of-function phenotypes, and that their functional impact could not have been predicted solely by their frequency in patient cohorts. Our work provides a scalable, gene-agnostic method for coding variant impact phenotyping, with pote

PMID 35290801 :: Spatial CRISPR genomics identifies regulators of the tumor microenvironment.
   While CRISPR screens are helping uncover genes regulating many cell-intrinsic processes, existing approaches are suboptimal for identifying extracellular gene functions, particularly in the tissue context. Here, we developed an approach for spatial functional genomics called Perturb-map. We applied Perturb-map to knock out dozens of genes in parallel in a mouse model of lung cancer and simultaneously assessed how each knockout influenced tumor growth, histopathology, and immune composition. Moreover, we paired Perturb-map and spatial transcriptomics for unbiased analysis of CRISPR-edited tumors. We found that in Tgfbr2 knockout tumors, the tumor microenvironment (TME) was converted to a fibro-mucinous state, and T cells excluded, concomitant with upregulated TGFβ and TGFβ-mediated fibroblast activation, indicating that TGFβ-receptor loss on cancer cells increased TGFβ bioavailability and its immunosuppressive effects on the TME. These studies establish Perturb-map for functional genomics within the tissue at single-cell resolution with spatial architecture preserved and provide insig

PMID 35688146 :: Mapping information-rich genotype-phenotype landscapes with genome-scale Perturb-seq.
   A central goal of genetics is to define the relationships between genotypes and phenotypes. High-content phenotypic screens such as Perturb-seq (CRISPR-based screens with single-cell RNA-sequencing readouts) enable massively parallel functional genomic mapping but, to date, have been used at limited scales. Here, we perform genome-scale Perturb-seq targeting all expressed genes with CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) across >2.5 million human cells. We use transcriptional phenotypes to predict the function of poorly characterized genes, uncovering new regulators of ribosome biogenesis (including CCDC86, ZNF236, and SPATA5L1), transcription (C7orf26), and mitochondrial respiration (TMEM242). In addition to assigning gene function, single-cell transcriptional phenotypes allow for in-depth dissection of complex cellular phenomena-from RNA processing to differentiation. We leverage this ability to systematically identify genetic drivers and consequences of aneuploidy and to discover an unanticipated layer of stress-specific regulation of the mitochondrial genome. Our information-rich genotype

PMID 27984732 :: Perturb-Seq: Dissecting Molecular Circuits with Scalable Single-Cell RNA Profiling of Pooled Genetic Screens.
   Genetic screens help infer gene function in mammalian cells, but it has remained difficult to assay complex phenotypes-such as transcriptional profiles-at scale. Here, we develop Perturb-seq, combining single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-based perturbations to perform many such assays in a pool. We demonstrate Perturb-seq by analyzing 200,000 cells in immune cells and cell lines, focusing on transcription factors regulating the response of dendritic cells to lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Perturb-seq accurately identifies individual gene targets, gene signatures, and cell states affected by individual perturbations and their genetic interactions. We posit new functions for regulators of differentiation, the anti-viral response, and mitochondrial function during immune activation. By decomposing many high content measurements into the effects of perturbations, their interactions, and diverse cell metadata, Perturb-seq dramatically increases the scope of pooled genomic assays.

PMID 36608654 :: A transcription factor atlas of directed differentiation.
   Transcription factors (TFs) regulate gene programs, thereby controlling diverse cellular processes and cell states. To comprehensively understand TFs and the programs they control, we created a barcoded library of all annotated human TF splice isoforms (>3,500) and applied it to build a TF Atlas charting expression profiles of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) overexpressing each TF at single-cell resolution. We mapped TF-induced expression profiles to reference cell types and validated candidate TFs for generation of diverse cell types, spanning all three germ layers and trophoblasts. Targeted screens with subsets of the library allowed us to create a tailored cellular disease model and integrate mRNA expression and chromatin accessibility data to identify downstream regulators. Finally, we characterized the effects of combinatorial TF overexpression by developing and validating a strategy for predicting combinations of TFs that produce target expression profiles matching reference cell types to accelerate cellular engineering efforts.

PMID 31784727 :: Activity-by-contact model of enhancer-promoter regulation from thousands of CRISPR perturbations.
   Enhancer elements in the human genome control how genes are expressed in specific cell types and harbor thousands of genetic variants that influence risk for common diseases1-4. Yet, we still do not know how enhancers regulate specific genes, and we lack general rules to predict enhancer-gene connections across cell types5,6. We developed an experimental approach, CRISPRi-FlowFISH, to perturb enhancers in the genome, and we applied it to test >3,500 potential enhancer-gene connections for 30 genes. We found that a simple activity-by-contact model substantially outperformed previous methods at predicting the complex connections in our CRISPR dataset. This activity-by-contact model allows us to construct genome-wide maps of enhancer-gene connections in a given cell type, on the basis of chromatin state measurements. Together, CRISPRi-FlowFISH and the activity-by-contact model provide a systematic approach to map and predict which enhancers regulate which genes, and will help to interpret the functions of the thousands of disease risk variants in the noncoding genome.

PMID 33828297 :: Genome-wide enhancer maps link risk variants to disease genes.
   Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified thousands of noncoding loci that are associated with human diseases and complex traits, each of which could reveal insights into the mechanisms of disease1. Many of the underlying causal variants may affect enhancers2,3, but we lack accurate maps of enhancers and their target genes to interpret such variants. We recently developed the activity-by-contact (ABC) model to predict which enhancers regulate which genes and validated the model using CRISPR perturbations in several cell types4. Here we apply this ABC model to create enhancer-gene maps in 131 human cell types and tissues, and use these maps to interpret the functions of GWAS variants. Across 72 diseases and complex traits, ABC links 5,036 GWAS signals to 2,249 unique genes, including a class of 577 genes that appear to influence multiple phenotypes through variants in enhancers that act in different cell types. In inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), causal variants are enriched in predicted enhancers by more than 20-fold in particular cell types such as dendritic cells, and

PMID 37488417 :: Dynamic network-guided CRISPRi screen identifies CTCF-loop-constrained nonlinear enhancer gene regulatory activity during cell state transitions.
   Comprehensive enhancer discovery is challenging because most enhancers, especially those contributing to complex diseases, have weak effects on gene expression. Our gene regulatory network modeling identified that nonlinear enhancer gene regulation during cell state transitions can be leveraged to improve the sensitivity of enhancer discovery. Using human embryonic stem cell definitive endoderm differentiation as a dynamic transition system, we conducted a mid-transition CRISPRi-based enhancer screen. We discovered a comprehensive set of enhancers for each of the core endoderm-specifying transcription factors. Many enhancers had strong effects mid-transition but weak effects post-transition, consistent with the nonlinear temporal responses to enhancer perturbation predicted by the modeling. Integrating three-dimensional genomic information, we were able to develop a CTCF-loop-constrained Interaction Activity model that can better predict functional enhancers compared to models that rely on Hi-C-based enhancer-promoter contact frequency. Our study provides generalizable strategies for

PMID 37734371 :: The COPD GWAS gene ADGRG6 instructs function and injury response in human iPSC-derived type II alveolar epithelial cells.
   Emphysema and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) most commonly result from the effects of environmental exposures in genetically susceptible individuals. Genome-wide association studies have implicated ADGRG6 in COPD and reduced lung function, and a limited number of studies have examined the role of ADGRG6 in cells representative of the airway. However, the ADGRG6 locus is also associated with DLCO/VA, an indicator of gas exchange efficiency and alveolar function. Here, we sought to evaluate the mechanistic contributions of ADGRG6 to homeostatic function and disease in type 2 alveolar epithelial cells. We applied an inducible CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) platform to explore ADGRG6 function in iPSC-derived AT2s (iAT2s). We demonstrate that ADGRG6 exerts pleiotropic effects on iAT2s including regulation of focal adhesions, cytoskeleton, tight junctions, and proliferation. Moreover, we find that ADGRG6 knockdown in cigarette smoke-exposed iAT2s alters cellular responses to injury, downregulating apical complexes in favor of prolifer

PMID 34174819 :: UniBind: maps of high-confidence direct TF-DNA interactions across nine species.
   Transcription factors (TFs) bind specifically to TF binding sites (TFBSs) at cis-regulatory regions to control transcription. It is critical to locate these TF-DNA interactions to understand transcriptional regulation. Efforts to predict bona fide TFBSs benefit from the availability of experimental data mapping DNA binding regions of TFs (chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing - ChIP-seq). In this study, we processed ~ 10,000 public ChIP-seq datasets from nine species to provide high-quality TFBS predictions. After quality control, it culminated with the prediction of ~ 56 million TFBSs with experimental and computational support for direct TF-DNA interactions for 644 TFs in > 1000 cell lines and tissues. These TFBSs were used to predict > 197,000 cis-regulatory modules representing clusters of binding events in the corresponding genomes. The high-quality of the TFBSs was reinforced by their evolutionary conservation, enrichment at active cis-regulatory regions, and capacity to predict combinatorial binding of TFs. Further, we confirmed that the cell type and tissue spe

PMID 34751401 :: ReMap 2022: a database of Human, Mouse, Drosophila and Arabidopsis regulatory regions from an integrative analysis of DNA-binding sequencing experiments.
   ReMap (https://remap.univ-amu.fr) aims to provide manually curated, high-quality catalogs of regulatory regions resulting from a large-scale integrative analysis of DNA-binding experiments in Human, Mouse, Fly and Arabidopsis thaliana for hundreds of transcription factors and regulators. In this 2022 update, we have uniformly processed >11 000 DNA-binding sequencing datasets from public sources across four species. The updated Human regulatory atlas includes 8103 datasets covering a total of 1210 transcriptional regulators (TRs) with a catalog of 182 million (M) peaks, while the updated Arabidopsis atlas reaches 4.8M peaks, 423 TRs across 694 datasets. Also, this ReMap release is enriched by two new regulatory catalogs for Mus musculus and Drosophila melanogaster. First, the Mouse regulatory catalog consists of 123M peaks across 648 TRs as a result of the integration and validation of 5503 ChIP-seq datasets. Second, the Drosophila melanogaster catalog contains 16.6M peaks across 550 TRs from the integration of 1205 datasets. The four regulatory catalogs are browsable through track hu

PMID 32728250 :: Global reference mapping of human transcription factor footprints.
   Combinatorial binding of transcription factors to regulatory DNA underpins gene regulation in all organisms. Genetic variation in regulatory regions has been connected with diseases and diverse phenotypic traits1, but it remains challenging to distinguish variants that affect regulatory function2. Genomic DNase I footprinting enables the quantitative, nucleotide-resolution delineation of sites of transcription factor occupancy within native chromatin3-6. However, only a small fraction of such sites have been precisely resolved on the human genome sequence6. Here, to enable comprehensive mapping of transcription factor footprints, we produced high-density DNase I cleavage maps from 243 human cell and tissue types and states and integrated these data to delineate about 4.5 million compact genomic elements that encode transcription factor occupancy at nucleotide resolution. We map the fine-scale structure within about 1.6 million DNase I-hypersensitive sites and show that the overwhelming majority are populated by well-spaced sites of single transcription factor-DNA interaction. Cell-co

PMID 32728217 :: Index and biological spectrum of human DNase I hypersensitive sites.
   DNase I hypersensitive sites (DHSs) are generic markers of regulatory DNA1-5 and contain genetic variations associated with diseases and phenotypic traits6-8. We created high-resolution maps of DHSs from 733 human biosamples encompassing 438 cell and tissue types and states, and integrated these to delineate and numerically index approximately 3.6 million DHSs within the human genome sequence, providing a common coordinate system for regulatory DNA. Here we show that these maps highly resolve the cis-regulatory compartment of the human genome, which encodes unexpectedly diverse cell- and tissue-selective regulatory programs at very high density. These programs can be captured comprehensively by a simple vocabulary that enables the assignment to each DHS of a regulatory barcode that encapsulates its tissue manifestations, and global annotation of protein-coding and non-coding RNA genes in a manner orthogonal to gene expression. Finally, we show that sharply resolved DHSs markedly enhance the genetic association and heritability signals of diseases and traits. Rather than being confine

PMID 33536621 :: Regulatory genomic circuitry of human disease loci by integrative epigenomics.
   Annotating the molecular basis of human disease remains an unsolved challenge, as 93% of disease loci are non-coding and gene-regulatory annotations are highly incomplete1-3. Here we present EpiMap, a compendium comprising 10,000 epigenomic maps across 800 samples, which we used to define chromatin states, high-resolution enhancers, enhancer modules, upstream regulators and downstream target genes. We used this resource to annotate 30,000 genetic loci that were associated with 540 traits4, predicting trait-relevant tissues, putative causal nucleotide variants in enriched tissue enhancers and candidate tissue-specific target genes for each. We partitioned multifactorial traits into tissue-specific contributing factors with distinct functional enrichments and disease comorbidity patterns, and revealed both single-factor monotropic and multifactor pleiotropic loci. Top-scoring loci frequently had multiple predicted driver variants, converging through multiple enhancers with a common target gene, multiple genes in common tissues, or multiple genes and multiple tissues, indicating extensi

PMID 25693563 :: Integrative analysis of 111 reference human epigenomes.
   The reference human genome sequence set the stage for studies of genetic variation and its association with human disease, but epigenomic studies lack a similar reference. To address this need, the NIH Roadmap Epigenomics Consortium generated the largest collection so far of human epigenomes for primary cells and tissues. Here we describe the integrative analysis of 111 reference human epigenomes generated as part of the programme, profiled for histone modification patterns, DNA accessibility, DNA methylation and RNA expression. We establish global maps of regulatory elements, define regulatory modules of coordinated activity, and their likely activators and repressors. We show that disease- and trait-associated genetic variants are enriched in tissue-specific epigenomic marks, revealing biologically relevant cell types for diverse human traits, and providing a resource for interpreting the molecular basis of human disease. Our results demonstrate the central role of epigenomic information for understanding gene regulation, cellular differentiation and human disease.

PMID 32814038 :: Atlas of Transcription Factor Binding Sites from ENCODE DNase Hypersensitivity Data across 27 Tissue Types.
   Characterizing the tissue-specific binding sites of transcription factors (TFs) is essential to reconstruct gene regulatory networks and predict functions for non-coding genetic variation. DNase-seq footprinting enables the prediction of genome-wide binding sites for hundreds of TFs simultaneously. Despite the public availability of high-quality DNase-seq data from hundreds of samples, a comprehensive, up-to-date resource for the locations of genomic footprints is lacking. Here, we develop a scalable footprinting workflow using two state-of-the-art algorithms: Wellington and HINT. We apply our workflow to detect footprints in 192 ENCODE DNase-seq experiments and predict the genomic occupancy of 1,515 human TFs in 27 human tissues. We validate that these footprints overlap true-positive TF binding sites from ChIP-seq. We demonstrate that the locations, depth, and tissue specificity of footprints predict effects of genetic variants on gene expression and capture a substantial proportion of genetic risk for complex traits.

PMID 31942977 :: ChIPSummitDB: a ChIP-seq-based database of human transcription factor binding sites and the topological arrangements of the proteins bound to them.
   ChIP-seq reveals genomic regions where proteins, e.g. transcription factors (TFs) interact with DNA. A substantial fraction of these regions, however, do not contain the cognate binding site for the TF of interest. This phenomenon might be explained by protein-protein interactions and co-precipitation of interacting gene regulatory elements. We uniformly processed 3727 human ChIP-seq data sets and determined the cistrome of 292 TFs, as well as the distances between the TF binding motif centers and the ChIP-seq peak summits. ChIPSummitDB enables the analysis of ChIP-seq data using multiple approaches. The 292 cistromes and corresponding ChIP-seq peak sets can be browsed in GenomeView. Overlapping SNPs can be inspected in dbSNPView. Most importantly, the MotifView and PairShiftView pages show the average distance between motif centers and overlapping ChIP-seq peak summits and distance distributions thereof, respectively. In addition to providing a comprehensive human TF binding site collection, the ChIPSummitDB database and web interface allows for the examination of the topological ar

PMID 32296183 :: A reference map of the human binary protein interactome.
   Global insights into cellular organization and genome function require comprehensive understanding of the interactome networks that mediate genotype-phenotype relationships1,2. Here we present a human 'all-by-all' reference interactome map of human binary protein interactions, or 'HuRI'. With approximately 53,000 protein-protein interactions, HuRI has approximately four times as many such interactions as there are high-quality curated interactions from small-scale studies. The integration of HuRI with genome3, transcriptome4 and proteome5 data enables cellular function to be studied within most physiological or pathological cellular contexts. We demonstrate the utility of HuRI in identifying the specific subcellular roles of protein-protein interactions. Inferred tissue-specific networks reveal general principles for the formation of cellular context-specific functions and elucidate potential molecular mechanisms that might underlie tissue-specific phenotypes of Mendelian diseases. HuRI is a systematic proteome-wide reference that links genomic variation to phenotypic outcomes.

PMID 33961781 :: Dual proteome-scale networks reveal cell-specific remodeling of the human interactome.
   Thousands of interactions assemble proteins into modules that impart spatial and functional organization to the cellular proteome. Through affinity-purification mass spectrometry, we have created two proteome-scale, cell-line-specific interaction networks. The first, BioPlex 3.0, results from affinity purification of 10,128 human proteins-half the proteome-in 293T cells and includes 118,162 interactions among 14,586 proteins. The second results from 5,522 immunoprecipitations in HCT116 cells. These networks model the interactome whose structure encodes protein function, localization, and complex membership. Comparison across cell lines validates thousands of interactions and reveals extensive customization. Whereas shared interactions reside in core complexes and involve essential proteins, cell-specific interactions link these complexes, "rewiring" subnetworks within each cell's interactome. Interactions covary among proteins of shared function as the proteome remodels to produce each cell's phenotype. Viewable interactively online through BioPlexExplorer, these networks define prin

PMID 28514442 :: Architecture of the human interactome defines protein communities and disease networks.
   The physiology of a cell can be viewed as the product of thousands of proteins acting in concert to shape the cellular response. Coordination is achieved in part through networks of protein-protein interactions that assemble functionally related proteins into complexes, organelles, and signal transduction pathways. Understanding the architecture of the human proteome has the potential to inform cellular, structural, and evolutionary mechanisms and is critical to elucidating how genome variation contributes to disease. Here we present BioPlex 2.0 (Biophysical Interactions of ORFeome-derived complexes), which uses robust affinity purification-mass spectrometry methodology to elucidate protein interaction networks and co-complexes nucleated by more than 25% of protein-coding genes from the human genome, and constitutes, to our knowledge, the largest such network so far. With more than 56,000 candidate interactions, BioPlex 2.0 contains more than 29,000 previously unknown co-associations and provides functional insights into hundreds of poorly characterized proteins while enhancing netwo

PMID 35271311 :: OpenCell: Endogenous tagging for the cartography of human cellular organization.
   Elucidating the wiring diagram of the human cell is a central goal of the postgenomic era. We combined genome engineering, confocal live-cell imaging, mass spectrometry, and data science to systematically map the localization and interactions of human proteins. Our approach provides a data-driven description of the molecular and spatial networks that organize the proteome. Unsupervised clustering of these networks delineates functional communities that facilitate biological discovery. We found that remarkably precise functional information can be derived from protein localization patterns, which often contain enough information to identify molecular interactions, and that RNA binding proteins form a specific subgroup defined by unique interaction and localization properties. Paired with a fully interactive website (opencell.czbiohub.org), our work constitutes a resource for the quantitative cartography of human cellular organization.

PMID 28596423 :: Integration of over 9,000 mass spectrometry experiments builds a global map of human protein complexes.
   Macromolecular protein complexes carry out many of the essential functions of cells, and many genetic diseases arise from disrupting the functions of such complexes. Currently, there is great interest in defining the complete set of human protein complexes, but recent published maps lack comprehensive coverage. Here, through the synthesis of over 9,000 published mass spectrometry experiments, we present hu.MAP, the most comprehensive and accurate human protein complex map to date, containing > 4,600 total complexes, > 7,700 proteins, and > 56,000 unique interactions, including thousands of confident protein interactions not identified by the original publications. hu.MAP accurately recapitulates known complexes withheld from the learning procedure, which was optimized with the aid of a new quantitative metric (k-cliques) for comparing sets of sets. The vast majority of complexes in our map are significantly enriched with literature annotations, and the map overall shows improved coverage of many disease-associated proteins, as we describe in detail for ciliopathies. Using hu.MAP, we 

PMID 39526397 :: CORUM in 2024: protein complexes as drug targets.
   CORUM (https://mips.helmholtz-muenchen.de/corum/) is a public database that offers comprehensive information about mammalian protein complexes, including their subunits, functions and associations with human diseases. The newly released CORUM 5.0, encompassing 7193 protein complexes, is the largest dataset of manually curated mammalian protein complexes publicly available. This update represents the most significant upgrade to the database in >15 years. At present, the molecular processes in cells that are influenced by drugs are only incompletely understood. In this latest release, we have begun systematically investigating the impact of drugs on protein complexes. Our studies are based on a dataset from DrugCentral comprising 725 protein drug targets with approved drugs and known mechanisms of action. To date, we have identified 1975 instances from the literature where a drug affects the formation and/or function of a protein complex. Numerous examples highlight the crucial role of understanding drug-protein complex relationships in drug efficacy. The expanded dataset and the inclu

PMID 33070389 :: The BioGRID database: A comprehensive biomedical resource of curated protein, genetic, and chemical interactions.
   The BioGRID (Biological General Repository for Interaction Datasets, thebiogrid.org) is an open-access database resource that houses manually curated protein and genetic interactions from multiple species including yeast, worm, fly, mouse, and human. The ~1.93 million curated interactions in BioGRID can be used to build complex networks to facilitate biomedical discoveries, particularly as related to human health and disease. All BioGRID content is curated from primary experimental evidence in the biomedical literature, and includes both focused low-throughput studies and large high-throughput datasets. BioGRID also captures protein post-translational modifications and protein or gene interactions with bioactive small molecules including many known drugs. A built-in network visualization tool combines all annotations and allows users to generate network graphs of protein, genetic and chemical interactions. In addition to general curation across species, BioGRID undertakes themed curation projects in specific aspects of cellular regulation, for example the ubiquitin-proteasome system,

PMID 39558183 :: The STRING database in 2025: protein networks with directionality of regulation.
   Proteins cooperate, regulate and bind each other to achieve their functions. Understanding the complex network of their interactions is essential for a systems-level description of cellular processes. The STRING database compiles, scores and integrates protein-protein association information drawn from experimental assays, computational predictions and prior knowledge. Its goal is to create comprehensive and objective global networks that encompass both physical and functional interactions. Additionally, STRING provides supplementary tools such as network clustering and pathway enrichment analysis. The latest version, STRING 12.5, introduces a new 'regulatory network', for which it gathers evidence on the type and directionality of interactions using curated pathway databases and a fine-tuned language model parsing the literature. This update enables users to visualize and access three distinct network types-functional, physical and regulatory-separately, each applicable to distinct research needs. In addition, the pathway enrichment detection functionality has been updated, with bet

PMID 28794006 :: Identification of the SOX2 Interactome by BioID Reveals EP300 as a Mediator of SOX2-dependent Squamous Differentiation and Lung Squamous Cell Carcinoma Growth.
   Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide, with squamous cell carcinoma (SQCC) being the second most common form. SQCCs are thought to originate in bronchial basal cells through an injury response to smoking, which results in this stem cell population committing to hyperplastic squamous rather than mucinous and ciliated fates. Copy number gains in SOX2 in the region of 3q26-28 occur in 94% of SQCCs, and appear to act both early and late in disease progression by stabilizing the initial squamous injury response in stem cells and promoting growth of invasive carcinoma. Thus, anti-SOX2 targeting strategies could help treat early and/or advanced disease. Because SOX2 itself is not readily druggable, we sought to characterize SOX2 binding partners, with the hope of identifying new strategies to indirectly interfere with SOX2 activity. We now report the first use of proximity-dependent biotin labeling (BioID) to characterize the SOX2 interactome in vivo We identified 82 high confidence SOX2-interacting partners. An interaction with the coactivator EP300 was subsequentl

PMID 35649251 :: Defining the versican interactome in lung health and disease.
   The extracellular matrix (ECM) imparts critical mechanical and biochemical information to cells in the lungs. Proteoglycans are essential constituents of the ECM and play a crucial role in controlling numerous biological processes, including regulating cellular phenotype and function. Versican, a chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan required for embryonic development, is almost absent from mature, healthy lungs and is reexpressed and accumulates in acute and chronic lung disease. Studies using genetically engineered mice show that the versican-enriched matrix can be pro- or anti-inflammatory depending on the cellular source or disease process studied. The mechanisms whereby versican develops a contextual ECM remain largely unknown. The primary goal of this review is to provide an overview of the interaction of versican with its many binding partners, the "versican interactome," and how through these interactions, versican is an integrator of complex extracellular information. Hopefully, the information provided in this review will be used to develop future studies to determine how versic

PMID 37914802 :: Targeting the COMMD4-H2B protein complex in lung cancer.
   Lung cancer is the biggest cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 85-90% of all lung cancers. Identification of novel therapeutic targets are required as drug resistance impairs chemotherapy effectiveness. COMMD4 is a potential NSCLC therapeutic target. The aims of this study were to investigate the COMMD4-H2B binding pose and develop a short H2B peptide that disrupts the COMMD4-H2B interaction and mimics COMMD4 siRNA depletion. Molecular modelling, in vitro binding and site-directed mutagenesis were used to identify the COMMD4-H2B binding pose and develop a H2B peptide to inhibit the COMMD4-H2B interaction. Cell viability, DNA repair and mitotic catastrophe assays were performed to determine whether this peptide can specially kill NSCLC cells. Based on the COMMD4-H2B binding pose, we have identified a H2B peptide that inhibits COMMD4-H2B by directly binding to COMMD4 on its H2B binding binding site, both in vitro and in vivo. Treatment of NSCLC cell lines with this peptide resulted in increased sensitivity to ionising radiation, inc

PMID 36217030 :: A comprehensive SARS-CoV-2-human protein-protein interactome reveals COVID-19 pathobiology and potential host therapeutic targets.
   Studying viral-host protein-protein interactions can facilitate the discovery of therapies for viral infection. We use high-throughput yeast two-hybrid experiments and mass spectrometry to generate a comprehensive SARS-CoV-2-human protein-protein interactome network consisting of 739 high-confidence binary and co-complex interactions, validating 218 known SARS-CoV-2 host factors and revealing 361 novel ones. Our results show the highest overlap of interaction partners between published datasets and of genes differentially expressed in samples from COVID-19 patients. We identify an interaction between the viral protein ORF3a and the human transcription factor ZNF579, illustrating a direct viral impact on host transcription. We perform network-based screens of >2,900 FDA-approved or investigational drugs and identify 23 with significant network proximity to SARS-CoV-2 host factors. One of these drugs, carvedilol, shows clinical benefits for COVID-19 patients in an electronic health records analysis and antiviral properties in a human lung cell line infected with SARS-CoV-2. Our study d

PMID 40963028 :: Basal cell of origin resolves neuroendocrine-tuft lineage plasticity in cancer.
   Neuroendocrine and tuft cells are rare chemosensory epithelial lineages defined by the expression of ASCL1 and POU2F3 transcription factors, respectively. Neuroendocrine cancers, including small cell lung cancer (SCLC), frequently display tuft-like subsets, a feature linked to poor patient outcomes1-9. The mechanisms driving neuroendocrine-tuft tumour heterogeneity and the origins of tuft-like cancers are unknown. Using multiple genetically engineered animal models of SCLC, we demonstrate that a basal cell of origin (but not the accepted neuroendocrine origin) generates neuroendocrine-tuft-like tumours that highly recapitulate human SCLC. Single-cell clonal analyses of basal-derived SCLC further uncovered unexpected transcriptional states, including an Atoh1+ state, and lineage trajectories underlying neuroendocrine-tuft plasticity. Uniquely in basal cells, the introduction of genetic alterations enriched in human tuft-like SCLC, including high MYC, PTEN loss and ASCL1 suppression, cooperates to promote tuft-like tumours. Transcriptomics of 944 human SCLCs revealed a basal-like subse

